THE POSITIVE
MOVEMENT


THE REGENERATIVE                  BUSINESS
HANDBOOK



A practical guide empowering companies and leaders to unleash positive impact and deliver systemic change.






The Regenerative Business Handbook
A practical guide to empower companies and leaders to unleash positive impact and deliver systemic change. 

First edition, Copyright © September 2020. 
The Positive Movement - postv.net

Editorial Team
Stephen Vasconcellos -  Founder, Positive
Niels de Fraguier - Founder, CEO, Positive
Laurie Barat - Contributor, Founder, Dendropolis
Mathias Barat - Contributor, Founder, Dendropolis
Sidney Rostan - Contributor, Founder, BioXegy
Laura Guandián González - Graphic design and illustrations

Acknowledgments
This Handbook was developed over several months by the core team of Positive and the grateful and valuable support of external contributors, proofreaders, and reviewers. We freely quote a great number of writers, economists, scientists and systems thinkers who have inspired us and on whose shoulders we walk. We are particularly grateful to the Positive Movement’s own founding members for their inspiring,  often groundbreaking, work that has helped us illustrate this Handbook with such powerful case studies of Regenerative businesses at the cutting edge of change.







Logo Positive
office@postv.net
postv.net
LinkedIn
Twitter
Facebook
Instagram


Table of contents


PART 1: INTRODUCTION    4
Chapter 1: Foreword    4
1. Moving from a Sustainable to a Regenerative Economy    4
2. What is a Regenerative Business?    6
3. Regenerative is Resilient    8
Chapter 2: The Regenerative Economy    12
The Main Characteristics of a Regenerative Economy    12
1. In Right Relationship    13
2. Views Wealth Holistically    13
3. Innovative, Adaptive, Responsive    14
4. Empowered Participation    15
5. Honours Community and Place    15
6. Edge Effect Abundance    16
7. Robust Circulatory Flow    17
8. Seeks Balance    17
PART 2: REGENERATIVE BUSINESS & THE WHOLE SYSTEM    19
Chapter 3: Biomimicry    19
Chapter 4: A Systemic Approach    19
1. What is Systems Change?    19
2. Why Systems Change?    20
3. Earth Systems &  “A safe Space for Humanity”    20
4. Operating from “Wholeness”: 7 Indigenous Principles    21
Chapter 5: The Importance of Purpose    24
1. Purpose at the Core    24
Regenerative Companies have higher purpose    24
2.  Purpose as an Evolutionary Tool    27
3. The Company as an Organism    28
PART 3: THE POSITIVE COMPASS    30
Chapter 6: The Four Positive Values    30
1. Right Relationship with Nature (PLANET)    31
2. Elevating Human Potential (PEOPLE)    32
3. Empowering Communities (PLACES)    32
4. Recognizing Value for All (PARTNERS)    32
Chapter 7: Right Relationship with Nature (PLANET)    32
1.  Understanding Right Relationship    33
2. Carbon Neutrality (& Beyond)    34
3. Beyond Circularity    36
4. A Restorative Relationship with Nature:    40
5. Accounting for Nature    41
Chapter 8: Elevating Human Potential (PEOPLE)    44
1. Understanding Human Potential    44
2. Empowered Participation:  Knowledge and Training    45
3. Empowered Participation: Intrapreneurship    46
4. Empowered Participation: Distributed Decision-making    47
5. Wholeness & Self-management    49
6. Wellbeing    50
7.  Governance    52
Chapter 9: Empowering Communities (PLACES)    54
1. Understanding Communities and Places    54
2. Bioregion    55
3. Reinventing Relationship with Place    56
4. Unlocking Local Value    60
5. Intrinsic Value of Nature    61
6. Measuring Social Impact    63
Chapter 10: Value for All (PARTNERS)    64
1. Understanding Value for All    64
2.  From Supply Chains to Value Webs and Cycles    67
3.  Human Rights & Fair Trade    70
4.Solutions Revolution: a Time for Radical Collaboration    72
Glossary - Definitions    75














PART 1: INTRODUCTION

Chapter 1: Foreword
1. Moving from a Sustainable to a Regenerative Economy
sustainable
/səˈsteɪnəb(ə)l/
Adjective
able to be maintained at a certain rate or level.
 
Scientists estimate that humanity is currently using nature 1.75 times faster than our planet’s ecosystems can regenerate, or otherwise stated, we are consuming 1.75 Earths every year (Earth Overshoot day, 2019). This ecological deficit began in the early 1970s and means that as we have depleted our natural capital, we have compromised the planet’s future Regenerative capacity imperilling the health and wellbeing of the whole system. Ironically, we went into overshoot just as the environmental movement began to take off. The first Earth Day traces its roots to the glorious Earthrise shot taken by the Apollo 8 mission. This powerful image had a profound effect on people viewing it for the first time, as expressed so beautifully by Carl Sagan;

“There is perhaps no better demonstration of the folly of human conceits than this distant image of our tiny world. To me, it underscores our responsibility to deal more kindly with one another, and to preserve and cherish the pale blue dot, the only home we’ve ever known”   
  Carl Sagan, Pale Blue Dot
 
In the 50 years since, the world has witnessed both a doubling in population, while Industrial activity, biodiversity loss, increased C02 emissions, soil erosion, and pollution have pushed many ecosystems to breaking point. Governments have still to come to any meaningful agreement on how to decarbonize our economies. There has been no recognition by the world’s largest economies that our consumptive habits are causing the 6th greatest extinction. Earth is already 1 degree Celsius hotter than pre-industrial times and on course for 1.5 degrees by 2030 (IPCC, 2018), with an overheated and burned out planet beyond that.
 
Nonetheless, we may be witnessing the green shoots of a silent revolution. Could humanity be on the verge of a developmental leap forward? The environmentalist Paul Hawken seems to think so. He has argued that a silent army of change-makers, entrepreneurs, social enterprises, nonprofits and community organisations, dedicated to a plethora of causes, has been building a movement with the potential to benefit the whole planet. He calls it the “environmental and social justice movement” (Blessed Unrest, 2007).

Mainstream business, notwithstanding its role as the greatest driver of many of the issues imperilling our planet, has in recent decades pivoted towards ‘Sustainability’. The concept has been interpreted — and actions implemented — in very different ways by companies. With notable exceptions, the overall report card shows a distinct lack of focus and commitment. Most companies have been tinkering around the edges. A great number of Fortune 500 companies have well financed CSR and Sustainability teams. Some of the better companies win plaudits from the international community as they mitigate some of their harsher impacts. Still, these same corporations continue to devastate huge areas with monoculture, polluting our oceans with plastic, and selling products we don’t need or even really want. Often, these are just as bad for people as they are for the planet, full of chemicals and in packaging that will be around for another 1000 years. At the same time, they shirk their fiscal responsibilities,  hiding behind complex artificial legal structures, operating in a legal grey zone, funnelling trillions of dollars of income through offshore havens. As this unfolds, greenwashing has co-opted the language of change. Too many companies use CSR initiatives as a fig leaf to provide cover for highly profitable but questionable activities which hurt society and the environment. Corporate double-speak has confused the general public and sapped useful energy from the many good actors in the wider environmental change space. Clearly, we now need a root and branch rethink of capitalism and the consumer economy — an economy selling the wrong dream. Of course, there are many shades of capitalism, and there are brave outliers breaking new ground. A growing body of companies are reaching for change instinctively, and many more are currently being dreamt into existence, precisely to respond to some of the greatest challenges of our time. These are noble endeavours, and it fills us with pride at Positive to bear witness to the energy of our fellow change-maker entrepreneurs. This growing army of purpose-led innovators represents a diversified movement spread across all areas of the economy.
 
In 2019, John Elkington, ‘Godfather’ of the Sustainability movement, announced a recall of his triple bottom line concept of “People, Planet and Profit” in the Harvard Business Review. Elkington did this because he said his framework was intended to provoke systems change, and not just be an interesting accounting gimmick. His latest book, “Green Swans: The Coming Boom in Regenerative Capitalism” illustrates how his thinking has evolved, now arguing that even leading capitalists recognize that capitalism is broken. Many, like Elkington, now believe that a Regenerative economy is not just preferable, but has the ability to unlock both a solutions revolution for people, planet and prosperity, and deliver systems change.
 
And so, the time has come for another great experiment, another ‘moonshot’ in our ongoing attempts to reframe the role of business in relationship to people and planet. Whereas Sustainability was about doing less bad, today we need a Regenerative economy predicated on doing a whole lot more good. This distinction is subtle but key in an overshoot world. Whereas Sustainability views the planet as a resource that must be shared; the Regenerative economy recognizes Earth as a conscious living being and demands that we assume the role of caretakers. It has been said that Regenerative businesses support win-win-win solutions, systemic health, and collaborative networks that serve both people and planet. Instead of taking a siloed approach to bolting on Sustainability, we take a systemic 360 degree viewpoint, placing the company, as an organism, within the complex and interconnected web of life as a nested system. With the Positive Movement, we draw inspiration from many economists, scientists and system thinkers who have informed our own work, including that of John Fullerton, the godfather of Regenerative economics, whose “8 principles of a Regenerative economy” we quote liberally from in this handbook. Kate Raworth’s work on ‘Doughnut Economics’ is worth a special shout out to, as with scientist Johan Rockstrom and his groundbreaking work on the ‘9 Planetary Boundaries”.  In line with the worldview expressed by these authors,  Regenerative businesses are also in the business of systems change. We understand by committing to change, we may need to get uncomfortable. Though of course, the flipside means stepping into alignment with Nature’s rhythms and flows. The Positive Movement’s  goal is to encourage thousands of new businesses to shape a Regenerative economy worthy of our Humanity and this beautiful Earth — this wonderful pale blue dot — we call home. As we do so, we are emboldened by the words of the chemist and Nobel Laureate, Illya Prigogine.
 
“When a system is far from equilibrium small islands of coherence in a sea of chaos have the capacity to lift the entire system to a higher order.”
Illya Prigogine 

2. What is a Regenerative Business?

Definition

Regenerative businesses are guided by a transformative evolutionary purpose serving the wellbeing of both people and planet, doing no harm, and making a net positive impact.  
Their systemic approach makes them more resilient than other companies. 

Regenerative businesses are guided by four key values; 

i)   Right relationship with nature; 
ii)  Elevating human potential; 
iii) Value for all; 
iv) Honouring place and community. 

Regenerative businesses have a number of key traits, they;                     

1. Respect locality - including community, biodiversity, bio-regions & culture                                                  2  Foster wellbeing , intrapreneurship, participation,  & Resilience                                                                                     3. Have transformative and evolutionary purpose serving people and planet                                                                          4. Understand “wholeness” &  think, design and operate systemically                                                   5. Adopt a collaborative vs a competitive mindset                                                 6. Think in terms of intergenerational equity and multi capitalism                                                                                                                               7. Challenge the status quo, traditional structures & governance




MULTI-CAPITAL 



























3. Regenerative is Resilient

“Resilience is about being able to overcome the unexpected. Sustainability is about trying to survive. The goal of Resilience is to thrive” Jamais Cascio



What is Resilience?
In ecology, Resilience is defined as the capacity of an ecosystem to respond to a disturbance by resisting damage and recovering quickly.  Today, the situation we are living in is changing so fast, that we must now think beyond the limitations of the sustainability paradigm if we are to adapt and ensure the long term survival of our species, and other species too.  This means adopting a more regenerative paradigm built on Resilience.  BSI Group defines organizational Resilience as: “the ability of an organization to anticipate, prepare for, respond and adapt to incremental change and sudden disruptions in order to thrive”. They go on to say that “It reaches beyond risk management towards a more holistic view of business health and success.  A resilient organization is one that not merely survives over the long term, but also flourishes - passing the test of time.”  Resiliency is the part of the Regenerative business’ DNA that empowers the company to anticipate, prepare for, respond and adapt to all manner of disruption be they changes in customer buying preferences  or aggressive competitors, or issues with suppliers, growing environmental challenges, and even pandemics.

There are three aspects of Resilience and two types, reactionary and transformational;
ii) Reactionary: a) unrelenting persistence in the face of disruption 
ii) Reactionary: b) adaptation in response to disruption to recover the old status quo.
iii) Transformational: involves a (r)evolutionary or transformative response.



As you can see from the diagram, the second type of  Resilience delivers transformational outcomes. A Regenerative approach to the Climate Crisis would be transformational in that it would involve radical systemic change including for example addressing root causes of inequality and social and environmental justice and the relinquishing of vested interests from elites. A Sustainability response of the reactionary/adaptive type is unlikely to rock the boat too much and would seek to protect enough of the old system to continue as is without challenging the current system of financialized capitalism and stakeholder primacy, or causing too much discomfort for the same elites. A key trait of transformation is discomfort, and those embarking on this path should be prepared to let go of fixed goals and outcomes, as well as give up notions of control, as the journey becomes the destination. Evolutionary purpose can seemingly have a mind of its own. We do not control it, we hold space for it to emerge.  Likewise, Regenerative companies cultivate cultures that enable their people to develop the capacity to bounce back from challenges. Resilience is built by establishing a Regenerative culture, and by winning hearts and minds, one by one. Resilient people make resilient cultures.  Teams become resilient because their team members learn, adopt and implement the techniques and tools needed to protect themselves from the negative fallout of stressful events. The extent to which a Regenerative business can embed this training, thinking and behavior into its day to day work practices will determine how quickly a company can respond to disruption.

“Regeneration goes beyond Resilience or sustainability. Whatever is resilient, restored, robust, or sustainable resists or recovers from shocks and stays the same. Shocks make a regenerative business better. It rebounds and has the capacity to do more and be more.” Carol Sanford, author of The Regenerative Business

Resilient cultures usually focus on four aspects of performance;

Mental tools & practices:
Developing  self-regulation, re-framing thoughts, managing change and self-awareness.

Wellbeing tools & practices:
Promoting a wellbeing culture, good health, proper rest and sleep, good nutrition and exercise.

Social tools & practices:
Fostering stronger relationships, team member connectedness and flowing communication.

Spiritual tools & practices:
Building a participatory culture guided by  strong values, and evolutionary purpose.

When teams adopt resiliency-building behaviors, resilient leaders emerge. When a community of leaders have become resilient, the entire culture shifts. Regenerative companies develop tools, practices and rituals that strengthen these four pillars. 

Because Regenerative businesses express a higher evolutionary purpose serving the best interests of people and planet they already tend towards inbuilt Resilience.  Because Positive member companies adopt the four values of the Positive Compass, they are committed to elevating human potential and seek balance and harmony by virtue of their own nature. They understand the concept of “wholeness” as it plays out on the individual, company, and planetary levels. Though it is important to be mindful of the importance of building a Regenerative culture for team members so that your organisation is primed to thrive.

“When you change the way you think (beliefs), you change the way you believe (expectations), you change expectations (attitude), you change attitude (behavior) and you change behavior (performance). When you change behavior, you change the culture” James Kerr

The problem may also provide the solution
This is a fundamental principle of the permaculture movement, which regenerative companies, with their ability to adapt and innovate, have co-opted. Regenerative businesses have an innate gift  of imagining and creating effective solutions for seemingly intractable challenges. The act of describing a challenge as a problem gives it power and may shape our ability to respond. Modern psychotherapy gives credence to this phenomenon and has developed a great number of tools to support problem solving, such as cognitive behavioural therapy. When we expand our consciousness and reframe our perspectives, we can often find the blessing in a particular situation. Even with major stressors, we can choose to look for the diamond in the situation. This is also the foundation of design thinking processes where design is used to solve problems. In this instance, designers envisage that the future output of the process will provide a better solution than the current one, or if nothing is available – something entirely new.


Case Study: Knepp Estate, England
Knepp Castle Estate comprises 3,500 acres of heavy weald clay in West Sussex. The estate had been farmed intensively since WW2, though it rarely made a profit. Rewilding has turned around Knepp’s fortunes after a powerful new vision guided by ecologists and the local wildlife trust, was implemented at the estate in partnership with Natural England who provided support. The farmland is now profitable. Their focus on rewilding resulted in a series of successful spin off enterprises including safaris and glamping.  A commitment was made to allow natural processes rather than set particular goals and outcomes. The estate introduced free-roaming grazing animals - including wild cattle, ponies, pigs and deer - to drive the natural regenerative processes. This helped to replicate nature’s own processes where different (lost) herbivores would have grazed the land thousands of years ago. The complimentary different types of grazing preferences these animals helped to create an interconnected mosaic of habitats ranging from; grassland and scrub; natural woodlands; and wood pasture.The animals are left to their own devices yet  provide wild-range, slow-grown, pasture-fed organic meat for which there is a sizeable growing market paying premium prices. In just over a decade Knepp has seen a biodiversity explosion. It is now a breeding hotspot for purple emperor butterflies, turtle doves and 2 percent of the UK’s population of nightingales.



Questions
What steps are you taking  to make your company resilient and prepare for challenges?
What are the main factors of your company’s weaknesses/stability? 
How are you equipping your colleagues to become more resilient? 
Is your culture a resilient culture? If not, what can you do to make it so?
What steps can you take to fortify your company during the Covid era and beyond? 
What are the key attributes of your model and to what extent can these be affected by disruption?
How could Climate Change impact your company and what do resilient solutions look like?
To what extent are employees encouraged  to innovate/respond to unprecedented disruptors?
What would a resiliency response look like in the event of rapid change in your sector?
Can you turn your challenges into opportunities? 
How would you design solutions from the future working backwards?






Chapter 2: The Regenerative Economy


The Main Characteristics of a Regenerative Economy

“The universal patterns and principles the cosmos uses to build stable, healthy, and sustainable systems throughout the real world can and must be used as a model for economic-system design”                                                     John Fullerton


In Regenerative Capitalism, John Fullerton highlights eight key characteristics and universal patterns of a regenerative economy geared to deliver shared prosperity on a thriving planet. Building on and integrating the work of many, Fullerton is the godfather of Regenerative Economics, first conceived in his 2015 paper. These 8 characteristics are listed below with illustrated examples; 



1. In Right Relationship

“It is the long history of humankind (and animal kind, too) those who learned to collaborate and improvise most effectively have prevailed”  Charles Darwin

Right Relationship:
“Understands that the ecosphere is composed of nested systems, living and nonliving. Recognizes that the human economy is embedded in both culture and the ecosphere and must operate in dynamic and cooperative relationship with them, respecting cultural needs and planetary limits. Allows for critical value adding exchanges to occur at all scales in reciprocal relationship, in contrast with commoditized transactions.” - John Fullerton

Right Relationship in Nature: 
Nature is often portrayed as a competitive system with Darwin’s notion of “survival of the fittest” used to support.  Yet, it appears that Darwin’s bigger message was that cooperation, and ultimately compassion, are better guarantors of a species’ long term success and thrivability. Darwin wrote in The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex that “sympathy will have been increased through natural selection, for those communities which include the greatest number of the most sympathetic members, would flourish best, and rear the greatest number of offspring.” In other words, when it comes to the survival and thrivability of species, collaboration, and compassion, not competition, is more important. Sometimes that cooperation is interspecies, for example, with the Oxpecker bird and the rhinoceros and zebra. Oxpeckers pick and eat the ticks and parasites that live on their skin in an exchange that is mutually beneficial. 

Right Relationship in Business:  
The narrow focus of late stage capitalism on maximizing shareholder value is no longer sustainable for people or the planet. Regenerative companies prioritize environmental and social goals as much as financial returns. The economy is understood as a dimension of our human civilization, which, in turn, is just one element of the interconnected web of life on the planet. Assuming “right relationship” to and within the interconnected  web of life changes the dynamic. This perspective can transform business into a force for good to address some of the great challenges of our day.


2. Views Wealth Holistically

Holistic Wealth: 
“Defines wealth in terms of the wellbeing of the ‘whole’ rather than only what is reducible to money. Redefines wealth to mean multiple kinds of capital beyond financial wealth. Recognizes that numerous dimensions of human and natural capital cannot be measured in monetary terms but must be nurtured as intrinsic components of holistic wealth.” - John Fullerton

Holistic Wealth in Nature: 
Comprising less than 5% of the world's population, indigenous people protect 80% of global biodiversity.  Indigenous peoples have an holistic view of Nature and see themselves as stewards whose role is to maintain balance. Biodiverse regions provide abundant resources for great numbers of species to thrive. As many as 44% of all species of vascular plants and 35% of all species in four vertebrate groups are confined to 25 hotspots comprising only 1.4% of the land surface of the Earth - and provide a rich source of inspiration and materia prima for pharmaceuticals, biotech and other innovations. 

Holistic Wealth in Business: 
Businesses that embody Regenerative principles understand that true wealth includes much more than just financial returns - and that there are other types of capital including human, social and natural capital.  Natural capital has not generally been measured by accountants. To start including nature into the business process, companies and accountants will need new tools. That’s why the Natural Capital Protocol was developed (natural capital coalition.org). This is the world's first set of common standards for supporting strategic decision-making around a sustainable relationship with natural capital. The protocol lays out the foundations of a natural capital accounting system that goes further than traditional balance sheets.

 
3. Innovative, Adaptive, Responsive

Innovation: 
“In a world in which change is both ever-present and accelerating, the qualities of innovation and adaptability are critical to health”. It is this idea that Charles Darwin intended to convey in this often-misconstrued statement attributed to him: “In the struggle for survival, the fittest win out at the expense of their rivals.” What Darwin actually meant is that: the most “fit” is the one that fits best i.e., the one that is most adaptable to a changing environment.” - John Fullerton

Innovation in Nature: 
Evolution has had hundreds of millions of years to perfect itself, whereas industrial engineering has only been around for a few hundred. Nasa has been learning from the humble gecko: tiny hairs on their feet allow these lizards to stick to and climb walls without diminishing their stickiness over time. The harder they press their feet the stickier they become. Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena have developed a material covered in miniscule synthetic hairs that stick when force is applied.  When Japanese engineers upgraded their high-speed bullet trains they encountered a challenge in dealing with the noise created by the displacement of air at the front of the trains entering tunnels creating a loud shock wave known. These shock waves were so strong they caused structural damage to several tunnels. A more streamlined, aerodynamic nose was needed. The engineers were inspired by Kingfisher birds which have specialized beaks that allow them to dive into water with barely a splash. The resulting trains had no boom, were 10 percent faster, and needed 15 percent less electricity.

Innovation in Business: 
The humpback whale is a hefty 36 tonnes, yet it is one of the ocean’s best swimmers, divers and jumpers. The whale’s aerodynamic abilities are enhanced by  bumpy protrusions on its fins. Researchers found that these unusual fins allowed the whale to manoeuvre in tight circles and entrap their prey in a ‘net’ of bubbles.  This observation led to the design of serrated-edge wind turbines that are considerably more efficient and quieter than the typical smooth blades. This led to the formation of WhalePower tubercle technology, a company developing a range of tubercle technology products, with different innovations across wind turbines, hydroelectric turbines, irrigation pumps, and ventilation pumps.


4. Empowered Participation

Empowered Participation:
 “All healthy living systems are self-organizing and operate through continual negotiation with one another and in constant ‘conversation’. So too, a healthy human economy requires the empowered participation of individuals and groups, negotiating in their own enlightened self-interest as they naturally promote the health of the whole.” - John Fullerton

Empowered Participation in Nature: 
As pollinators, bees make a huge contribution to the wider ecosystem. They support the growth of trees, flowers, and other plants, which in turn provide food and shelter for all sorts of creatures.  Bees are what is known as a keystone species, ensuring the survival not only of plants but other organisms that depend on those plants for their own survival.

Empowered Participation in Business: 
Empowered by the internet, a new generation of businesses has been building out all manner of “new power” platforms. Many marketplace and social media startups from etsy to Youtube to ebay have been leveraging this new trend.  Dutch nursing company Buurtzog and the Black Lives Matter and Me too movements, have adopted various degrees of this approach to create empowered and dynamic distributed collectives.


 
5. Honours Community and Place

Community & Places: 
“Each human community consists of a mosaic of peoples, traditions, beliefs, and institutions uniquely shaped by long-term pressures of geography, human history, culture, local environment, and changing human needs. Honoring this fact, a Regenerative Economy nurtures healthy and resilient communities and regions, each one uniquely informed by the essence of its individual history and place.” - John Fullerton

Community & Places in Nature: 
Speciation is how a new kind of plant or animal species is created. This happens when a group is separated from the main species and develops its own special characteristics over time as it adapts to a new environment. This is the story of the Galápagos finch which live in separate colonies on various islands in the Galápagos archipelago. Each finch species has developed, over millions of years,  a unique beak that has adapted to the different food sources on the different islands; from large, blunt beaks for nuts and seeds to long, thin beaks for feeding from cactus flowers and more regular shaped beaks for eating insects. 

Community & Places in Business:
The concept of “Think Global, Act Local” is gaining currency as more and more companies understand the importance of “subsidiarity” in responding to the needs and special demands of communities at the smallest possible scale. This process is also known as “glocalization,” and today even multinational corporations are adopting this as a strategy in order to better serve their markets with tailored branding.  Regenerative businesses are best placed to apply this principle more authentically because they are closer to the communities they serve and have better “listening” and motives. They can do so because they operate from the perspective of “wholeness” and their relationships are not transactional or exploitative. 

 
6. Edge Effect Abundance

Edge Effect Abundance:
 “Creativity and abundance flourish synergistically at the “edges” of systems, where the bonds holding the dominant pattern in place are weakest. For example, there is an abundance of interdependent life in salt marshes where a river meets the ocean. At those edges the opportunities for innovation and cross-fertilization are the greatest. Working collaboratively across edges – with ongoing learning and development sourced from the diversity that exists there – is transformative for both the communities where the exchanges are happening, and for the individuals involved.” - John Fullerton

Edge Effects in Nature: 
Edge effects are often observed in coastal zones e.g. in mangroves which have rich biodiversity and provide habitat for organisms that can survive in both water and land. Ecotones (regions where two ecosystems overlap), contain a greater diversity of species and have significantly greater productivity because resources from both ecosystems can be accessed in the one place. 

Edge Effects in Business: 
Recognizing we have entered a new era where global challenges have proliferated-and no single sector can solve them alone, William Eggers and Paul Macmillan observe in their book The Solution Revolution, how business, government, and social enterprises are joining forces to solve society's toughest problems: They observe “a big shift to a new kind of economy in which entrepreneurship and innovation range freely across public and private sectors, [...] a critical juncture in our global economy, [...]an accelerating shift toward a new operating paradigm, in which entrepreneurship and innovation range freely across all of the sectors that shape our lives as citizens and consumers [...] a system where choice, Sustainability, and more adaptive ecosystems offer all of us the ability to collaborate toward better solutions.”


7. Robust Circulatory Flow

Circularity: 
“A Regenerative material economy mimics the metabolic process found in resilient living systems, up taking what we now discard as ‘waste’ in an ongoing, productive, circulatory, and value-enhancing flow. Likewise for the circulatory, value-enhancing flow of information and money.” - John Fullerton

Circularity in Nature:
Nature recycles everything-there is no such thing as waste. Nature is by definition a Regenerative system in which everything serves a purpose — even at the end of its life cycle when it is returned back to the system to begin a new cycle as illustrated by fallen leaves becoming humus to feed the forest floor and trees that shed them. 

Circularity in Business: 
Food waste is a major challenge; one third of all food is wasted globally amounting to about 1.3billion tonnes costing $1trillion annually, and if food waste were a country, it would be the 3rd largest emitter of CO2 after the US and China. About ⅓ of all food is wasted, and this is an appalling situation for a planet where 820m people are hungry, up from 811 million in the previous year, which is the third year of increase in a row. In 2015, the world came together to define the UN Sustainable Development Goals (UN SDGs) which set out 17 goals  for the planet. Leaders recognized the urgency of creating a circular economy for a finite planet with limited resources, not just because of food waste, but because of the enormous waste that our consumption economy creates and sends to landfill. Today’s linear “take-make-dispose” economic model has already breached supply and demand limitations. A circular system will allow companies to move beyond mitigating these risks to capture the USD$ 4.5 trillion economic opportunity that the circular economy represents. In terms of the business case for food waste, the consultancy KPMG estimates the opportunity is roughly US2.7trillion by 2050, should we switch to a circular food waste system. 
8. Seeks Balance

Balance: 
“Being in balance is more than just a nice way to be; it is actually essential to systemic health. Like a unicycle rider, Regenerative systems are always engaged in this delicate dance in search of balance. Achieving it requires that they harmonize multiple variables instead of optimizing single ones. A Regenerative Economy seeks to balance: efficiency and Resilience; collaboration and competition; diversity and coherence; and small, medium, and large organizations and needs.” - John Fullerton

Balance in Nature: 
Biodiversity provides stability for ecosystems and helps to maintain the ecological balance. Plants and animals in ecosystems are linked to each other through the food chain and food web. The loss of one species automatically affects the survival of other species. Thus the ecosystem becomes fragile. Nature has inbuilt feedback loops that help it stay in balance, and recover with the right conditions.

Balance in Business: 
Today’s globalized economy is interconnected to such an extent that when there are distortions or corrections in one geography or sector such as with a stock market crash in an open economy, ripples, and sometimes even shockwaves, are felt throughout the entire system as the whole seeks to assimilate these feedback loops often with great disruptive consequences and fallout. In such a system there are always winners and losers, and often there is a race to the bottom for price, at the expense of workers and the global south.  Yet when companies choose to trade in harmony with their suppliers, such as in the fair trade movement, prices are agreed by mutual participation, with the guiding principles of fairness and empowerment, which allows deeper and more meaningful development to take root. 




Case studies illustrating the 8 patterns


Case Study: Re-Rooted
Positive founding member Re-Rooted is reinventing how people drink milk. Their dairy-free drinks are responsibly and organically sourced with no additives, delivered by a new generation of milkmen in zero emission electric vehicles with returnable, refillable glass bottles. They seek to minimize their footprint at every turn and give 1% of their profits to good causes. 

Case Study: N’Go Shoes
N’Go Shoes, a Positive founding member, works with Vietnamese craftspeople to bring their wears to western markets. In addition to working with local communities, N'go shoes cooperates with a non-profit organization called Sao Bien to support childhood education in Vietnam. Each year, 2% of N’Go’s revenue is donated to Sao Bien to help educate children from the ages of 6 to 11 years old in the poorest and most remote areas of Vietnam.

Case Study: Aduna
Aduna, a Positive founding member, empowers communities in Ghana by working with them to create a sustainable marketplace for Baobab fruit - a veritable superfruit - so that the community benefit from a partnership that sets a fair price for their product with a significant re-investment both in women’s empowerment,  and in Regenerative projects such as the Great Green Wall of Africa where a forest buffer is being planted to hold off the advance of the Sahara. 

Case Study: Olio
Positive founding member Olio is tackling the issue of circularity with a food sharing app offering last minute food waste from restaurants, supermarkets and families at a significant discount to members. The company connects neighbours with each other and Food Waste Hero volunteers with local businesses, to share food (and other things) rather than chuck them away. Olio is supporting businesses to achieve a zero waste target while allowing them to redistribute their surplus food to local communities.

Case study: Guayapi
Guayapi was founded with a commitment to promote traditional methods and to have a positive environmental and social impact in both the Amazon and in Sri Lanka where its partners are. The main activities involve distribution of raw materials and preparations inspired by local communities, such as food supplements, cosmetics, tea and spices.  Guayapi  has partnered with the International Analog Forestry Network (IAFN), whose focus is “restoring the planet’s life support systems” to ensure that biodiversity is restored to the tropical ecosystems it engages with.


PART 2: REGENERATIVE BUSINESS & THE WHOLE SYSTEM

Chapter 3: Biomimicry 
https://biomimicry.org/what-is-biomimicry/
This will be around 2 pages (LAURA)


Chapter 4: A Systemic Approach    
1. What is Systems Change?
The definition of a system includes a set of rules,  an arrangement of elements, or an interconnected group of interdependent parts that work together in service of a common goal or purpose. Examples of  systems include; the laws and procedures of democratic governments which are supported by civil society and held to account by a functioning press; and the digestive system, made up of a number of  organs that work together for digestion alongside enzymes and other processes. They can be small or large.  The sum of the parts is often much greater than elements taken in isolation.  A systems approach recognizes that interactions of the parts may not be static and constant but dynamic and fluid.
Systemic Change is about addressing the root causes of social and environmental problems, which are often viewed as intractable and deeply embedded in networks of cause and effect. Systemic change is an intentional process aimed at  fundamentally altering components and structures which cause the system to behave inefficiently. Systemic change is driven by transformational, not incremental change. Systems change becomes important when we want to deal with the underlying causes of social and environmental problems, and not just mitigate the consequences of malfunctioning systems. The Positive initiative is a system change moonshot to create a new economy built around harmony with Nature. 
2. Why Systems Change?

Humanity faces a number of complex, interdependent and overlapping challenges, and there is clear evidence that many of our critical systems are failing with; climate chaos, inequality, poverty, ecological breakdown, a crisis in global governance and an economic model which now threatens the balance of life itself. Without a clear understanding of how these challenges and crises play out within the context of the bigger picture, we can only expect solutions which merely treat the symptoms and not the underlying causes. System thinking shows us how individuals, communities, places, eco-systems, as well as businesses, actions, and innovations have high degrees of interconnectivity. Systems thinking empowers us to respond to  the challenges we must now face in a volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous (VUCA) world. We have recently entered an unstable new phase with potentially catastrophic consequences for the future of humanity whereby the overlapping and interdependent global challenges we face can only be resolved by transformational system change. The application of systems thinking is a powerful tool which can be used to disentangle the web of interconnected dependencies underpinning these complex problems.  A systems approach can also empower us to anticipate unforeseen consequences, as well as identifying the best courses of action and “acupuncture points” which can be prioritized for their exponential impacts . 

3. Earth Systems &  “A safe Space for Humanity”
 

 
In 2009 a group of Earth system and environmental scientists, led by Johan Rockström from the Stockholm Resilience Centre, defined the "safe operating space for humanity." The institute’s 9 planetary boundaries framework is based on scientific evidence that human actions since the Industrial Revolution have become the main driver of global environmental change.  Positive’s movement for a  Regenerative economy recognizes these boundaries.  Our goal is to build a thriving economy within the safe operating space for humanity - which may be ambitious, but is also critical given the gravity of the scientific feedback loops. The Positive model acknowledges that our current economic system - built on scarcity and competition for resources - is the main cause of earth overshoot.  A pivot towards a Regenerative economy can deliver the necessary course correction needed in order to restore health and wellbeing to the system.  
In line with the  Stockholm Resilience Centre’s 9 Planetary Boundaries Kate Raworth has inspired a new approach to economic systems thinking in her book “Doughnut Economics.”  Kate Raworth’s thesis is a wake-up call to transform a late stage capitalism obsessed with growth at all costs into a more balanced, Regenerative economy operating within the safe zone that can allow both humans and our planet to thrive.
 
4. Operating from “Wholeness”: 7 Indigenous Principles
 
The Positive Movement is guided by 7 indigenous principles; wholeness; stewardship; future generations; treading gently on the earth; wellbeing for all; human connectedness & honouring place & community. The notion of “wholeness” is foundational. Indigenous communities have much to teach us about living in harmony and in balance with Nature - their profound know how and low impact ways of life make them the most ancient and successful civilisations on Earth - even though they, and the biodiverse lands they protect, are now threatened by extractive capitalism.  Accordingly, the following 7 indigenous principles have inspired the Positive Compass.   
 

 
Wholeness
A commonality shared by most of the ancient indigenous wisdom traditions is a cosmology based on interconnectedness and wholeness. This is expressed as Mitakuye Oyasin by the Lakota Sioux and means "All My Relations." This prayer sums up the indigenous philosophy of oneness and harmony with all forms of life; whether they be people, animals, birds, insects, trees and plants, minerals and even the stars. There are no hierarchies in this cosmovision. This understanding places human beings within the interconnected web of life, understanding our role within all of Creation, and acknowledging our shared kinship with all other species. Everything is connected.  Similarly, Aboriginal cosmology is also anchored by a worldview of “oneness, and of belonging", a connectedness with "deep innermost feelings". In this worldview, everything else is secondary. In Wolof in West Africa, this whole-world view is expressed as ‘aduna.’ Interestingly, recent breakthroughs in quantum physics corroborate this connected worldview.
 
 
Stewardship
 
A quarter of the land on our planet is owned, used, occupied or managed by indigenous peoples. This figure includes 35 percent of terrestrial areas with very low human impacts, as well as approximately 35 percent of lands under formal protection.  Indigenous peoples live a low impact lifestyle in synch with the places they belong to, because they have adopted a caretaker role. They see themselves as part of the land, rather than as owners. Indigenous peoples understand how to manage the natural resources and environmental hazards such as species decline and pollution because they understand the concept of balance. A key feature of indigenous spirituality is stewardship of the land, a responsibility which has often been passed down from generation to generation over thousands of years. For this reason, a recent UN report found that indigenous and local communities play such an important role in maintaining and managing biodiversity and landscapes that the rest of the world can learn from them. 
 

 
Protecting the interests of future generations
This is expressed as the seventh generation principle which states that we should make decisions about how we live today based on how our decisions will impact the future seven generations. This principle demands us to be caretakers of the earth, not just for our own benefit and utility, but for those who will inherit the earth, and who may have to live with the consequences of our decisions. This principle was best articulated by the Iraquois (Haudenosaunee) Great Law of Peace (Gayanashagowa) and has been adopted by a number of indigenous peoples in the Americas, and is expressed in other ways by different peoples. The Iroquois constitution is said to have inspired the American constitution.
 
 
Tread gently on the Earth 
Thousands of years before notions of "carbon footprint,"  “circularity" and “sustainability” were doing the rounds, indigenous peoples had understood the importance of living in balance with all life. This worldview is reflected across all the wisdom traditions and they have their own unique words and language to express that. Mitakuye oyasin (Lakota), nogomaq (Algonquian), gakina-awiiya (Anishinabe) Ea Nigada Qusdi Idadadvhn (Cherokee] all can be more or less translated to convey the same message: that we “we are all related to, and respect, everything in life.” More recently, the indigenous movement has been rallying behind the slogan “Mni Wiconi” meaning “water is sacred,” to protest oil pipelines across rivers in native territory. Embodying this principle requires us to desist from activities that do harm, and always be mindful of our actions and their impacts on land, water, air, and plant and animal life, minimizing our footprints wherever we go and doing our best to leave everyplace as close to how we found it as possible. On average, an inhabitant of North America consumes around 90 kilograms (kg) of resources each day. In Europe, consumption is around 45 kg per day, while in Africa people consume only around 10 kg per day.  The poorest 50% of the world’s population are only responsible for 10% of consumptive emissions.

 
 
Wellbeing for All
Netukulimk is a concept which expresses the use of the natural bounty provided by the Creator for the benefit and wellbeing of the individual and the community. The notion of Netukulimk is about achieving a sufficient standard of economic wellbeing without jeopardizing the health, integrity, and diversity of our natural environment. The concept comes from a traditional Mi’kmaq concept from the first peoples of Canada, celebrating the connection and balance between the natural and human worlds. Finding the right level of economic wellbeing for all-whilst balancing the needs of a degraded environment-is one of the greatest challenges we face as a collective in the 21st century. Presently, less than ten percent of the population are overconsuming whilst more than 800 million do not have enough to eat. 
Human connectedness
There are three important aspects worth highlighting; the concept of “ubuntu” which is a wide concept covering a deep appreciation of a shared humanity; respect for others, and radical collaboration. “Ubuntu” is a Nguni Bantu term from South Africa roughly translated as "humanity." It is often translated as "I am because we are," or "humanity towards others." In Xhosa this is expressed as "umntu ngumntu ngabantu."  The concept is said to convey the belief in a universal bond of sharing that connects all.  By embracing this principle of human connectedness, we also embrace respect, humility and tolerance of others. These attitudes are viewed as critical by numerous indigenous peoples from the Lakota to the Kogis to the Quechua. By adopting humility and tolerance, we give ourselves to greater understanding, and find greater levels of contentment within ourselves and with life around us. The third aspect involves collaboration. This is best illustrated by the Piaroa tribe in the Amazon who are hardwired for radical collaboration. Their mythologies hark back to an age when man was arrogant, obsessed with material wealth, pleasure and war before that civilisation died. Today, the Piaroa have been described by anthropologists as one of the world’s most peaceful societies, with almost no notable social hierarchies, and as a functioning anarchy. Indigenous cultures are highly collaborative and peaceful by design.  
​
 
Honouring place and community
Indigenous cultures experience a profound connection to their land, and with the entirety of nature that is associated with it, that Westerners have lost. In fact, land is seen by the indigenous cultures as a family member. Pachamama is the term given to Mother Earth by the people of the Andes who revere here, not j.  In Aboriginal culture, Land is added to mind, body and spirit wellness notions: "To recover our wellbeing, we have to pay attention to all four dimensions of our being, mind, body, spirit and land," explains Uncle Bob Randall.  “Kanyini” is the Aboriginal term that expresses this profound connectedness. There are different aspects including “ngura” (a sense of belonging to land and place), and “walytja” (belonging to  kinship).  Kanyini is nurtured through caring and practicing responsibility for all things. Aboriginal spiritual beliefs are intimately associated with the land they live on to the extent that their world view has been described as 'geo-sophical' (earth-centred) as opposed to the more western 'theosophical' (God-centred). The principle of Kanyini implies that everybody is responsible for each other.  It is a principle of connectedness that underpins Aboriginal life.  And because of connection, Kanyini teaches to look away from oneself and towards community: "We practise Kanyini by learning to restrict the ‘mine-ness’, and to develop a strong sense of ‘ours-ness’," explains Aboriginal Elder Uncle Bob Randall. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 5: The Importance of Purpose
1. Purpose at the Core 
Regenerative Companies have higher purpose
Fresh consumer data shows that customers view purpose-driven brands as being more caring and, as a result, are more loyal to them. According to the Havas Meaningful Brand Index, brands that embody purpose outperformed the stock market by 133%. Ernst and Young states that 73% of global consumers would switch to brands affiliated with a purpose.
79% of business leaders surveyed by PwC believe that an organization’s purpose is central to business success. The same study showed that purpose is a gamechanger for staff retention too -  millennials who identify with the purpose of their organization are 5.3 times more likely to stay on. Purpose is much more than a brand’s unique selling point. A strong purpose can also guide a business’ evolutionary path. At a basic level, purpose can simply express what an organization aspires to be and do. But at a more advanced one, it becomes a conscious expression of how an organization intends to evolve and transform itself.  What sets Regenerative companies aside from other companies is that they have clearly defined purposes - with most being “mission-led.”
Linear & Transformative Purpose
"Like any living system, every organization co-evolves. Its character and capabilities emerge as it plays with possibilities. It messes about with others until a workable system appears. This system has abilities and beliefs no one planned. It accomplishes work in ways no one designed.  It has relationships no one mandated.  While we worry about designs and structures, tweak procedures and rules, insist on compliance and control, we never succeed in creating an organization by these activities. Organization wants to happen. Human organizations emerge from processes that can be comprehended but never controlled."   
 
A Simpler Way, Margaret J. Wheatley and Myron Kellner-Rogers
Imagine a pencil company. A linear purpose might involve making resilient pencils. A transformative purpose might encompass a more transformative approach that empowered learning. A ‘higher’ transformative purpose, clearly defined, will also encourage the organization to address inconsistencies and gaps in its own culture. 
Purpose is a powerful driver when a company shifts attention to its own consciousness and inner growth. As companies embrace transformative purposes they are no longer boxed in by a narrow focus on linear/horizontal development (i.e. growing revenue and/or size).  At this stage, the higher purpose sets the company on course for a journey of evolutionary transformation (i.e. leveraging the company’s greatest transformative potentials both known and unknown). Regenerative businesses use their purpose as a goalpost in decision-making, in contrast with the forward pull of linear purpose, thus tapping into their transformative qualities (i.e., evolutionary and exponential growth).
Embracing such a higher transformative purpose requires companies to manifest and operate from a higher degree of consciousness. By adopting transformative purposes, Regenerative companies begin their journeys into self-awareness. 

When organizations progress along the scale of consciousness, the key question - according to Frederic Laloux, in Reinventing Organizations - becomes, “Are we  being true to ourselves? Does this correspond with how we are called to evolve? Are we being of service to others and the world?” This contrasts with “outer rightness“  (e.g. a positive mission), and involves inner rightness”. At this level conscious behaviours and rigorous enquiry become  essential tools for those organizations that wish to cultivate the transformative qualities of purpose. Nature, humankind, and relationships evolve, driven by a life force, and adapting, transforming and growing over time. Laloux categorizes the different developmental stages of the organization in terms of the consciousness they exhibit with Teal organizations represented as the most highly-evolved. Teal organizations are also viewed as independent energy fields with a purpose that transcends their shareholders. In Teal organizations, there are no owners in the classical sense, but stewards who support them to deliver their transformative purpose and be of service in the world. 
There are obvious parallels between Laloux’s Green and Teal level organizations and Positive’s Regenerative business model. Regenerative businesses have higher transformative purpose that transcends ownership.  The Positive  model is inspired by Nature and views the company as a living organism with its own consciousness. In addition,  it can be said that the Regenerative business model goes further in terms of expressly recognizing our place within the interconnected web of life and committing organisations to undertake to mitigate any/all impacts upon Nature. 
 
Purpose is an Indicator of Culture
An organization’s purpose is often a powerful indicator of where it is in its evolutionary process. In late stage capitalism, most old paradigm legacy companies have been focused on maintaining the status quo and their own influence, market ranking and standing. Culture has too often been subject to institutional power and hierarchy and secondary to the delivery of results. 
Regenerative businesses, being both purpose-led and mission driven, have  a more expansionary view. These companies have a deep-seated multi-stakeholder perspective with strong ethics.
Laloux argues that “Teal founders often use the same metaphor: profit is like the air we breathe. We need air to live, but we don’t live to breathe”. Tami Simon, the CEO of Sounds True, gives the definition of a business’s purpose: “We have this idea about business— everything we do has to help us make more money, be more productive or whatever. But that’s not my view of business. My view of business is that we are coming together as a community to fill a human need and actualize our lives”.  In Teal Organizations, profits are a byproduct of a job well done.”  Similarly, with Regenerative businesses, profits are a byproduct.
2.  Purpose as an Evolutionary Tool
Evolutionary purpose 
Instead of attempting to predict and control the direction of the organization, members strive to listen and understand where the organization is naturally drawn to go. With the transition to Regenerative models (and with Laloux’s Teal level organizations), people learn to transcend the fears of their egos in support of serving the greater good.  This process makes room for exploring deeper questions of meaning and purpose, both individually and collectively.  Transformative purpose is non-static.  The Regenerative purpose can be distinguished from that of other organisations where purpose is often projected by an organization’s leaders.  Companies may start with a narrow focus but soon develop exponentially as their evolutionary purpose guides them into unforeseen activities and impact. Meanwhile, having a large purpose is also good for growth too.  In 2014, Salim Ismail published Exponential Organizations, which looked at 100 of the fastest growing organizations to synthesize their key traits. They discovered all the companies on the list had a massive transformative purpose.

Evolutionary purpose in nature: imaginal cells
After consuming several times its body weight, the caterpillar, which is an organism of 7bn cells enters its cocoon and begins a process of metamorphosis. Imaginal cells are the cells which lie dormant in the caterpillar until the metamorphosis process begins, when they spring into action. The cells cluster and multiply, as the caterpillars internal organs fail and start breaking down into a cellular goo during this messy transformational process.  At a certain point, the caterpillar identifies the cells as a threat to its survival and tries to destroy them, however the imaginal cells use the provocation as a call to action, and emit a special frequency to connect with each other, further multiplying and clustering. When the imaginals agree a common frequency, the entity becomes a butterfly and the imaginals use the remains of the caterpillar to fuel its metamorphosis. The butterfly has a completely different DNA from the caterpillar.
 
Examples of Purpose in Action;
"Helping home-based patients become healthy and autonomous"  (Buurtzorg)  
 
"Two fundamental purposes: the first is to provide meaningful work in the area of Hallencourt, a rural area in northern France where good work is rare; the second is to give and receive love from clients"  (FAVI)
 
“To help humanity thrive by enabling all teams to work together effortlessly.” (Asana)
 
“Build the best product, cause no unnecessary harm, use business to inspire and implement solutions to the environmental crisis.” (Patagonia)
 
“To help bring creative projects to life.” (Kickstarter)
 
“To accelerate the world's transition to sustainable energy.” (Tesla)
“Spread ideas.” (TED)
 
“Bring about radical breakthroughs for the benefit of humanity.” (X Prize Foundation)
 
 
3. The Company as an Organism
A business is similar in many ways to other living, breathing organisms. Just as organisms are made up of cells which organise around different levels of complexity, companies are made up of humans who come together with a shared purpose and intent, often dividing into groups that have a specialised focus. They both consume energy and resources in order to thrive and grow.  Seeing a company as a living organism has implications when one compares this approach to a mechanistic world view. Power is held at the top of the system in such an organisation, and decision-making is the preserve of those leaders at the top of a linear chain of command. In organisations viewed as organisms, power is distributed, as with decision-making, and all members are valued and encouraged to play their unique part. Wholeness vests at the meta as well as the micro levels. 
What can we learn from highly synchronized constellations in the natural world - such as flocks of birds or school of fish - as they adapt and react to changes in their environment?  
 
The Company’s Essence
 
essence
/ˈɛs(ə)ns/
 
noun

the intrinsic nature or indispensable quality of something, especially something abstract, which determines its character.
 
“Essence is unique to each company, and cannot be made up. Once it is discovered or revealed, it can then be used to evoke alignment across the entire business, from suppliers to customers; executives to front-line creators. It is used in branding, but is not branding per se. It is similar to the uniqueness each child has in a family. Children prosper best when their essence is honored and contributed. Only years later will you know their brand and how they apply it to their work in the world. They will be most successful and creative when their life and work are aligned with their essence. The same is true for business.”                          Carol Sanford
The importance of essence is fundamental and goes to the very heart of an organization’s identity, beyond function, behaviour and ‘doing,’ at the core  ‘being’ level of its existence. No surprise then that the etymology of the word ‘essence’ is derived from the latin verb ‘esse’ meaning ‘to be.’   Connecting with this fundamental essence allows companies to become fully expressed organizations to show up in their entirety.
 

 
 
 

 
PART 3: THE POSITIVE COMPASS


Chapter 6: The Four Positive Values

As we build this economy of the future, there are 4 core values embedded within our Positive Compass. Other kitemarks come under fire for encouraging a box ticking approach: overly quantitative without measuring social good. Indeed, this has been a failure of the ESG (Environmental and Social Governance) metrics where oil and gas companies like Equinor, Schlumberger, Shell and Total have been consistently high performers in each dimension of ESG. The Positive Compass is a qualitative tool anchored in powerful values that demand continuous improvement - our members adopt a ‘do no harm’ ethos and sign up to making regenerative impacts. While our approach is qualitative first, we do support the use of quantitative tools that can provide companies with the data they need to inform their decision-making as they commit to living these goals. 

The Positive Compass has 4 directions, each representing a transformational value, purpose sits in the centre. The circle symbolises the wellbeing of the whole.  This is also the safe operating environment of humanity indicated by the work of the Stockholm Resilience Centre and the 9 Planetary Boundaries. The Positive Compass is also consistent with Kate Raworth’s “Doughnut Economics” and the work of the Wellbeing Economy Alliance;




1. Right Relationship with Nature (PLANET)
Being in harmony with and respecting our place in the interconnected web of life — expressing our fullest essence in relation to the healthiest expression of other entities in the system. Just as each tree has a reciprocal relationship with other entities in the forest.
2. Elevating Human Potential (PEOPLE)
Nurturing wellbeing, encouraging participation and creating the conditions for people to thrive within an inclusive and stimulating space with strong and transparent governance. Companies are like organisms. Just as in our own bodies we observe that our cells may have different functions and sizes, each has a special role and are supported by the whole.
3. Empowering Communities (PLACES)
We empower communities, honouring each place in its own unique way. We recognize each place is different and has its own special needs both from an ecological and cultural perspective. Just as every tree in the forest is unique, so are the ecosystems they support.
4. Recognizing Value for All (PARTNERS)
Recognizing ‘shared value’ and lifting others up so everyone can make their unique contribution to a healthier system, and we rise together. As with all ecosystems we recognize that the health and wellbeing of our organism is interdependent on the health of the wider system.


Chapter 7: Right Relationship with Nature (PLANET) 





1.  Understanding Right Relationship

“In right relationship” …... the conventional economic assumption of the separation of natural resources as inexhaustible inputs and wastes as outputs deposited into the environment without cost and regardless of toxicity, is replaced with realization that there are no “externalities” to a healthy, whole system.” John Fullerton

We inhabit a finite planet with limited resources, and since the 1970’s our current model which is geared up for infinite growth, has come up against the buffers with a number of serious feedback loops; from the 6th greatest extinction to the climate emergency, and unstable weather patterns which disrupting agriculture. In 1972 Donatella Meadows explored these issues in the groundbreaking report, The Limits to Growth. In that report, various scenarios were explored with the help of computer simulation; including those linked to exponential economic and population growth with a finite supply of resources. Two of the scenarios saw "overshoot and collapse" of the global system by the mid- to latter-part of the 21st century, while a third scenario resulted in a "stabilized world". To address these issues and bring the natural system into balance, we need to build a new economy that respects the limits of our natural resources and respects the health of ecosystems. This requires a significant shift in how we consume, and also involves designing out waste and pollution, and the creation of circular systems.  We need to build systems that are restorative and Regenerative, nested within earth’s own systems, that are in right relationship to nature.  This is the kind of economy envisaged by Kate Raworth’s Doughnut Economics, an economy that allows people and planet to thrive within a safe zone that respects the 9 Planetary Boundaries of the Stockholm Resilience Centre. 

The 18th-century scientist and explorer Alexander Von Humboldt, was the first to observe the world as a single interconnected organism by studying forests and climate. According to Humboldt, even the tiniest creature plays its role and together makes the whole, in which humankind is just one small part.  Yet humankind has been out of kilter with that harmonious balance for the best part of a century, perhaps since the onslaught of the industrial revolution. Today, scientists have marked the beginning of a new geological record called the Anthropocene which follows the Holocene, an epoch which was widely recognized as the ‘Goldilocks’ era, or safe zone for humanity. The Anthropocene era is characterized by human-led impacts upon the geological record. Yet while we entered that era unconsciously, we are also entering an age of consequences as the feedback loops become greater and greater. This era affords us to make a conscious collective choice about the future we create including the type of economy we choose.  

In a Regenerative economy where we uphold the value of right relationship to nature, we observe the wider system is made up of nested “wholes,” each of which has unique qualities and characteristics defined by place and culture. Here systemic health is always prioritized – decision-making factors in mutual benefit and health across all levels and systems. Additionally, the principle of subsidiarity is applied so that decisions are made at the lowest level possible. 


2. Carbon Neutrality (& Beyond) 
The 2030 commitment 
Recognizing the urgent need for humanity to address our climate emergency, Positive members commit to become carbon neutral by 2030 - or as soon as they can before that date - with a view to becoming carbon positive beyond including reaching zero carbon (also known as Net Zero) standards for buildings and transport. We start by measuring our carbon emissions - because we cannot manage what we do not know.  

Definitions:
Carbon neutral:  removes the same amount of  CO2 it emits in order to achieve net-zero carbon emissions, usually by purchasing carbon offsets or credits to make up the difference. 
Zero carbon: commonly applied to buildings & transportation. For a building to be zero carbon-certified it must  offset its energy use with renewable sources, in addition to any carbon emissions resulting from its construction.
Carbon negative: A carbon-negative company removes more carbon from the atmosphere than it releases (also known as “climate positive”). 

Green House Gas Emissions (GHGs)
Many goods and services emit GHG. Different types of GHG  include:

•    Combustible fuels (e.g. diesel, coal, end-of-life tires when sold for energy recovery).
•    Equipment powered by combustion 
(e.g. cars, ships and trains with combustion engines, kerosene lanterns, diesel- generators).
•    GHGs which are themselves sold as products (e.g. refrigerants).
•    Manufactured products containing GHGs emitted during use                                                                                             •    Manufactured products containing GHGs which can emit GHGs after use 
            (e.g. air  conditioners or refrigerators containing hydrofluorocarbons).

Three types of Emissions
There are three types of emissions, direct, indirect from energy, and indirect (other);


Scope 1: Direct Emissions
GHGs  from sources owned or controlled by the company including those created by manufacturing goods, and factory fumes (though does not include biomass combustion). 

Scope 2: Indirect Emissions from Energy
GHGs from the generation of purchased electricity, resulting in steam, heating & cooling.

Scope 3: Indirect Emissions
GHGs from sources that are not owned and not directly controlled by the company. They are usually found in the supplier relationships and procurement, outsourced activities, and employee travel and commute. IScope 3 emissions normally account for the lion’s share of GHG emissions. 

Scope 1 &  2 are easier to calculate than 3 – because they’re controlled by the company. 

Case Study:  Zellar

Positive founding member Zellar is a green energy intermediary company with a mission to help 1m companies get to net zero by 2030 and save 100m tonnes of CO2. Zellar’s groundbreaking technology connects SMEs to the data and insights that can help them to reduce your carbon footprint quickly and with minimal cost. 

Case Study: PawPrint

PawPrint is a company empowering people to fight climate change. Pawprint is an online eco companion to measure, understand and reduce your carbon footprint. The solution allows users to understand their carbon footprint, takes action to reduce their negative impact, compare progress with peers, explore local opportunities to make a positive impact, and get rewarded with Pawpoints that can be spent on real-life causes.

Ways to reduce:  Steps to Reduce Your Carbon Footprint at Work
Switch to a Renewable Energy Supplier  - Replace Business Trips with Video Conferencing - Work from Home
Recycle Waste - Switch to LED Lighting - Go Paperless - Cycle to Work - Switch Off Appliances at the End of the Day - Enable Power Save Mode - Unplug Phone Chargers - Swap a Desktop Computer for a Laptop - Recycle Metal Waste - Plant a Miyawaki Forest  (a densely planted forest the size of a tennis court -20x more carbon capture)  - Use Circular & Repurposed Materials - Purchase Recycled Materials - Recycle Old Computers  - Switch to Rechargeable Batteries - Use Hybrid Company Cars - Energy Efficient Appliances - Read the Newspaper Online - Use Ceiling Fans Rather than Air Conditioning - Advocate Meat Free Mondays - Or Go  Full Vegetarian - Have an Energy Consumption Audit - Ensure Efficient Heating/improve insulation - Offset with Tree Planting - Use Sustainable Office Furniture - Use Cleaner Fuels




3. Beyond Circularity



Definition 

“The circular economy is one that is restorative and Regenerative by design and aims to keep products, components, and materials at their highest utility and value at all times, distinguishing between technical and biological cycles. This new economic model seeks to ultimately decouple global economic development from finite resource consumption. It enables key policy objectives such as generating economic growth, creating jobs, and reducing environmental impacts, including carbon emissions.”  Foundation Ellen MacArthur 
     
Circular is often used interchangeably with the concept of zero-waste. Beyond circularity involves moving to an economic model where only “good” materials are used within circular systems: good meaning in this instance  that they cause no harm to people or the environment. The essential concept at the heart of the circular economy is to ensure we can unmake everything we make; to deliver social and environmental value, as well as economic.

Why is a circular economy important?

More than 92 billion tonnes of materials were extracted and processed in 2019 alone, contributing to roughly half of our global CO2 emissions and more than 90% of biodiversity loss, and draining precious water resources. Meanwhile only 8.6% of these extracted materials is recycled back into the system (mostly comprising food which is already biodegradable). Every day approximately 8 million pieces of plastic pollution find their way into our oceans. Roughly 5.25 trillion pieces of plastic (macro & micro) are estimated to be in the open ocean resulting in the death of around 100,000 marine mammals and turtles and 1 million seabirds every year. 


7 Elements of the Circular Economy

Design for the future:  Account for the systems perspective during the design process, to use the right materials, to design for appropriate lifetime and to design for extended future use

Incorporate digital technology:  Track and optimise resource use and strengthen connections across procurement relationships through digital, online platforms and technologies that provide insights.

Preserve and extend what is already there:  While resources are in-use, maintain, repair and upgrade them to maximise the life-cycle and give them a second life through take back strategies.

Prioritize Regenerative resources:  Ensure renewable, reusable, non-toxic resources are utilised as materials and energy in the most efficient way possible.

Use waste as a resource:  Utilise waste streams as a source of secondary resources and recover waste for reuse and recycling. Design out waste and pollution where possible. 

Rethink the business model:  Consider opportunities to create greater value and align incentives through business models that build on the interaction between products and services.

Collaborate to create shared value: Work together throughout the value cycle of a company’s procurement activities, internally within organisations and with the public sector to increase transparency and create shared value.

Case Study: Excess Materials Exchange

Positive Founder Member, Excess Materials Exchange (EME) is a digital marketplace where companies can exchange excess materials with each other where excess materials can be tracked using digital and RFID technology. Their partner’s material flows increased by 110% on average in financial value, and the ecological footprint reduces by 60%. Their pilot project resulted in the following impacts;

A potential CO2 emissions reduction of 123 kilo-tonnes of CO2, which equals the emission of all citizens of Amsterdam (862,987) driving from Amsterdam to Milan.
A potential creation of €64m in financial value and a reduction of €54m in environmental damage (eco-cost), resulting in a Total Value creation of €118m.
A water reduction of 2.1 million m3, equal to the content of 860 Olympic swimming pools.
An energy saving of 2,883 Terajoule, equal to the energy used by 5 yrs of Paris’ street lights  

Case Study: Pandobac
Positive founding member Pandobac is a company offering a service replacing disposable packaging with reusable transport bins, marketed in B2B, and also offers monitoring and cleaning services in its washing center. By providing restaurants with reusable boxes, Pandobac offers an alternative to single use packaging that often leads to waste production. Adapting to the existing logistics scheme, the reusable transport bins are collected on the next delivery, thus avoiding the addition of trucks on the roads.

Case Study: Newcy
Positive founding member Newcy is a company offering a hands-on solution that allows companies to replace their disposable cups with reusable cups directly in their vending machines, water fountains and cafeterias. After use, employees can place their cup in one of the company collectors provided for this purpose and Newcy will then take care of collecting, washing, and returning the cups to the distributor. With the clear purpose of changing habits, Newcy set up community activities to encourage the re-employment of cups by employees helping them to contribute to a positive impact.

Circularity draws on the 7 Rs.

Rethink:     Re-thinking business models and solutions at every level to be mindful of resource use and waste production i.e. the sharing economy.

Refuse:      Refuse to buy or accept products that harm the environment i.e. chemical cleaners and chemical solvents and unnecessary packaging.  Reconsider production inputs. 

Reduce:     Reduce, and use less. Think about what you use and buy. What is the minimum you could use? Reduce the energy you use in your facility by auditing usage and making savings .

Reuse:      Reuse things you already have instead of buying new- and save money. Replace single use items with reusables. Reuse packaging & containers & and refill printer cartridges. 

Repurpose:     Repurpose – find other uses for materials. This requires creativity  and craftiness i.e. by repurposing scrap paper for taking notes and wood crates for raised beds. 

Recover:     Recover embedded energy from non-recyclable waste material where feasible. Non-recyclable waste may at least be converted into energy through waste-to-energy processes. 

Recycle:     If the above options won’t work, recycle. Recycle everything you can – paper, plastic, metal, glass and also food waste, fabric, and electronics (in Japan 89% of electronics are recycled). 

What does the Circular Economy mean for Manufacturers/Retailers?
Manufacturers & retailers can build a closer customer relationship by offering value-added services i.e. repair/maintenance, reuse/redistribution, refurbishment/remanufacture & products as a service.

“We are here to make goods, not 'bads'” 
Bill Mcdonough, father of the circular economy

What does the Circular Economy mean for Designers?
Design is key  to designing out waste and pollution. As most products today were designed for the linear economy,  there is a huge opportunity to redesign products for the circular economy. 

What does this mean for Purchasers/Consumers?
Improving your understanding of 'circular products' by considering the entire life cycle will result in better purchasing decisions, and better inform about maintenance  and end of life strategies. 

What is a good product & service? 
A good product or service is one that has been created whilst respecting the environment and all of 





Case Study:  Vepluche

Positive founding member Vepluche operates with a daily delivery service to local restaurants. The company delivers fresh vegetables and fruits to local restaurants while collecting their food waste transforming it into compost. Vepluche process more than 10 tons of organic waste per month producing its own compost that is then sold to local farmers and individuals.By doing so, the company ensure the distribution of bio food, encouraging local circuits and valuing waste for producers to increase their production.

Case Study: Bluedigo

Positive founding member Bluedigo supports companies to create friendly workplaces promoting the quality of life at work. Offering second-hand furniture, the company offers a wide range of furniture ranging from desks and chairs, to meeting tables that have previously been collected during company relocation. Promoting circular systems to equip companies with the best office equipment at a lower cost, Bluedigo gives a second life to furniture that usually would have been incinerated or displaced in landfills. Fostering positive impact working spaces, the company gives a very special value to positive working areas by providing high quality materials. Bluedigo also offers a selection of eco-responsible supplies to help organisations contribute to a positive impact for the planet.

Case Study: Ocean Bottle

Positive Founding Member Ocean Bottle are on a mission to stop plastic ending up in the Ocean. Their target is to remove 7bn plastic bottles by 2025. They produce a range of plant based non-toxic cleaning products that are gentle on the environment and don’t pollute or poison..  Because the functional life of a plastic bottle greatly exceeds the short time it takes to use the liquid in "pre-mixed" cleaning sprays, the company created the 'Bottle for Life'. With a one time purchase customers can break the cycle of throwaway plastic and switch over to a reusable plastic bottle.
By using a system of OceanSaver Pods with their 'Bottle for Life' the company is helping to transform plastic consumption and minimise the transportation of excess water - used to dilute the product - around the globe, thus cutting down on transport and logistic costs too.
4. A Restorative Relationship with Nature:
The Regenerative company and “net positive”
Today the more than 2 billion tonnes of waste our consumption economy produces every year is polluting our oceans and exhausting landfill capacity. Our climate emergency and the crisis we are creating by natural resource depletion and the ensuing devastation of vital ecosystems means we could face a very real risk of supply failures in food and other systems. Only by decoupling growth from environmental impact and protecting ecosystems can we create the conditions for people and planet to thrive. 

The following four principles have been developed by the Net Positive Project;

Regenerative 

“Creating long-term, sustained and absolute impact Net positive strategies revitalize the natural world, strengthen social communities, and improve individual well-being. They generate long term beneficial impacts and do not cause irreversible losses. The positive impacts that are created in one material exceed existing negative impacts or ‘footprints’ without irreversible loss in other material areas. While net positive is a journey, and progress is recorded, absolute reductions or improvements matter most. “

Material 

“Focusing on what matters most Net positive strategies focus on an organization’s greatest impacts on society and the environment as well as its largest areas of unique future potential. These are defined by internal and external stakeholders considering impacts along a company’s full value chain. All material issues must be addressed to achieve net positive – thus a positive impact in one material issue cannot compensate for the negative impact or ‘footprint’ in another material area. “

Systemic 

“Influencing change across entire systems Net positive strategies not only catalyse positive change across a company’s value chain—from raw material extraction through the use and disposal of its products and services—but they influence wider social, environmental, and economic systems. This recognizes that a single organization is unlikely to create and sustain positive social and environmental outcomes on its own. Given the dynamism of these systems, the scope and boundaries of a net positive strategy must be continually reassessed to acknowledge and manage relevant effects, and to ensure greatest impact.”

Transparent 

“Sharing progress openly and honestly Net positive strategies require action, progress, and measurement that are clear, credible, and easily accessible in communications. Attribution of all material impacts – both positive and negative – must be measurable and demonstrable, and independently verified where possible. Net positive information should be presented within clearly defined Sustainability context and reporting boundaries, and should be disaggregated to show effects on relevant issues, stakeholders, ecosystems, etc.”

“In applying these principles, net positive strategies should consider the unique impact context related to specific issues, stakeholders, value chain partners, geographies, ecosystems, landscapes, and populations. Positive impacts in one area do not compensate for negative impacts or ‘footprint’ in another; rather all relevant effects should be acknowledged and managed in aspiring for net positive impact”

5. Accounting for Nature            
“The first step towards the integration of Sustainability into economic development is the... measurement of the crucial role of the environment as a source of natural capital and as a sink for by-products generated during the production of man-made capital and other human activities.”      Rio Earth Summit, 1992 
We take for granted natural resources although they are now severely at risk across many sectors. Our collective failure to manage the earth’s resources has serious consequences reaching far beyond the environment.  There has been a 30% decline in biodiversity over the last forty years, and weaker ecosystems and scarcity of resources threaten not just food and water, but also the planet’s ability to deal with carbon emissions - and the economy. We are using more than 1.75 Earth’s every year and by 2030 we will be overshooting the planet’s ability to regenerate biocapacity by two times unless we radically overhaul our consumptive habits (Overshoot Day, 2020).

Natural resource depletion is expected to bring far greater risks  for businesses as profits  are eroded and business models impacted, Resource scarcity, regulatory action and consumer pressure are likely to increase, adding further pressure. As companies face up to the negative impacts of natural capital depletion - better use and management of natural resources is now vital for future success. Companies typically do not pay the full costs of environmental damage caused by their business activities, so these costs are “external” to financial accounts. As a result, markets are not accurately accounting for the dependence of businesses on ecosystem services such as clean water and a relatively stable and predictable climate. If we continue along the same trajectory global environmental costs could reach $28.6trn, or 18% of GDP in 2050 (UNEPFI).

Environmental Profit & Loss  (EP&L)

An Environmental Profit and Loss account places a monetary value on the environmental impacts of doing business. Just as a traditional P&L reports can inform businesses how to make better decisions, an EP&L does exactly the same - but with environmental factors. By looking at procurement value webs and day-to-day business operations, an EP&L can show you what your business is costing the Earth.



EP&L challenges and opportunities

EP&L accounts are a fairly new concept and are still a work in progress. Being in their infancy, there are still a number of barriers to adoption, including: a shortage of business case examples, no financial incentives, a lack of standardisation, no clear government frameworks, and most companies opting for business as usual. There are mixed feelings about attributing monetary values to environmental impacts. A number of concerned actors strongly oppose attributing financial values, especially when concerned with evaluating biodiversity impacts. This is due to the complexities, and also partly due to the notion of commercialising nature. Others see natural accounting as a useful tool, with some limitations, that allows an informed comparison of trade-offs and a powerful value based perspective to help inform better decisions. 
Complexity
The need to source certain data means that companies need data from suppliers, as well as secondary sources such as Life Cycle Analysis databases. Because of the complexity,  you may need to appoint someone ( internal or external) to oversee the process.

Quantification
What is the monetary value of  water or air? Is it possible to put a financial value on nature? If so, then it will certainly require specialist knowledge. However, only by quantifying what our activities are costing the planet can we begin a restorative relationship- that need not necessarily be by putting a financial value on these “costs” but by most certainly involves seeking other means to restore balance.  

Commitment
Investing time and energy in developing an EP&L is worthless unless you use your findings to inform action.

EP&L statements are ultimately decision-making tools
By accounting for externalities and quantifying (in monetary terms or otherwise) your environmental footprint, companies can make informed decisions. Becoming aware of your environmental impacts with an EP&L may help you shape how you think about your procurement value web, and your company’s footprint in nature. 
Case Study: Guayaki
Guayaki is a premium brand of yerba mate sold across North and Latin America. By creating a premium market for rainforest-grown yerba mate and paying above-market rates for the product, Guayakí supports local cultures providing a living wage. Guayakí does not 6. guayakí is more than a broker for the raw product, it works with the local community to identify and respond to their needs. Because of these close relationships, the farmers put extra effort into the product and give Guayakí the best-quality mate. It is a mutually beneficial relationship. Working with a Colombian NGO, Gaia Amazonas, Guayaki, which operates 3,000km away in the Atlantic forest of Paraguay, Brazil and Argentina acknowledges the interdependence of relationships with the Amazon preserved by indigenous groups by valuing rainfall that comes from the Amazon va “flying rivers.”

Questions

Do you have a strategy to address the question of carbon neutrality? 
Who is the appropriate leader in your team to address these issues?
What immediate opportunities exist to reduce or eliminate GHG emissions?
Can your production/facilities switch to renewable electricity sources? 
How do you evaluate the impact of your activities on the environment?
If you don’t measure GHG, you can’t manage it: what steps can you take to measure? 
What are the products and services that can more easily become carbon neutral?
What procedures do you need to set up with suppliers to measure scope 3 emissions?
Where is the easiest place to start reducing your carbon ?
Can your product or service be redesigned in order to reduce/transform its environmental impact?
How can you use your waste better? Or better still design it out altogether? 
Which of your purchases are necessary or can be reduced or swapped out?
What items can be replaced with those with a longer life-cycle?
What can you repurpose? 
Do you need to use this packaging? Are there better alternatives?
Are you using the best materials? 
Where could you use less or better? 
Where can you reduce impacts starting  from creation of the raw materials all the way to delivery?
What impacts are you making on the environment? 
Where is the easiest place for you to start your natural accounting journey?
What changes do you need to make to start capturing the information you need to account for impacts?


Chapter 8: Elevating Human Potential (PEOPLE) 
1. Understanding Human Potential
“Historically, organisations have always been places where people showed up wearing a mask… people often feel they have to shut out part of who they are when they dress for work in the morning…They require us to show a masculine resolve, to display determination and strength, and to hide doubts and vulnerability.” Frederic Laloux, Reinventing Organizations
Regenerative, purpose-driven, companies provide employees with a solid context for individuals to work together towards a shared goal.  Viewing the company with a systems lense as a whole rather than the sum of its parts, and as a living organism, places human relationships at the centre. Regenerative organisations build a consistent set of practices that empower their people to bring their whole selves to work, including the “emotional, intuitive and spiritual parts of ourselves.” (Laloux, Reinventing Organizations). These are practices that enable us to bring our whole selves to work- hence the term ‘wholeness’. Companies that allow their employees to show up as their whole selves are better equipped to unleash the fullest potentials of their teams. In doing so, the organisation can strengthen its culture, values, and support your organization fulfil its purpose and deliver its goals. Motivating your teams to bring their whole selves to work, and to contribute to the mission of your organisation is tremendously empowering for individuals, teams and companies. By doing so, you elevate and empower each of your team members, motivating them with the desire to work towards a clear purpose that inspires and that they can get behind to make a positive impact. Allowing employees to actively participate, share, co-create, and participate in distributed decision-making helps companies achieve more by encouraging more innovative solutions along the way. The participation of youth and women can facilitate the development of visionary strategies while ensuring fair representation.

By encouraging transformational leadership, leaders of today can help others build the skills companies need to progress and evolve towards a positive impact. Business leaders are being obliged to cope with important challenges such as unprecedented levels of stress in the workplace, resource insufficiency, profound inequalities, high competition, social tensions, quick digitalisation, weak supply chains, and much more. Considering the climate emergency and the sixth mass extinction threatening our humanity, these challenges are taking a much bigger importance in the public debate. Youth and minorities have been pioneering this field and are now urging influential stakeholders to act along with them. Leading by example, this call to action must be heard and implemented - and companies can now create a space so that every employee is given a chance to participate. Human dignity needs to be restored so that organisational systems are no longer ruled by hyper-competition, old power models, and strict hierarchies. 
Our human family has not only forgotten how to connect with nature but built an economy of exploitation and control around nature’s bounty. We now find ourselves in need of acknowledging the importance of emotional intelligence, of observing patterns and of respecting all our relationships, in order to help our ecosystems regenerate. It is only by re-establishing balance and respecting “wholeness” can we create the necessary foundations for an economy to thrive within the planetary boundaries.
Late stage capitalism has prioritized massive profits at the cost of workforce empowerment, viewing labour as another resource to be exploited. In the current context with extreme challenges affecting our society, the unity between individuals within the business ecosystem and their wellbeing should be a key priority. The creation of a culture of empowered participation represents an important milestone for our humanity, as we address the climate crisis and moving towards a Regenerative and distributive economy where we can all thrive. As we move away from a paradigm of control and exploitation, we discover that mutual understanding and openness are necessary attitudes if we are to create the space for dialogue, authenticity, transparency, vulnerability, trust and mutual respect to emerge within the company ecosystem.
2. Empowered Participation:  Knowledge and Training 

It goes without saying that it is extremely important for companies to nurture human potential, and that knowledge and training are two key components in any such strategy. Companies that facilitate the exchange of information and knowledge build more resilient and Regenerative businesses with stronger cultures of empowered participation/distributed decision-making and innovation. Here are some of the reasons why building a knowledge culture is important;

1. Improves employee performance
One powerful knock-on effect is a boost to productivity and performance. Well trained teams have a better understanding of targets and are also better equipped to meet them. 

2. Increases engagement
Ongoing training creates context for two-way communication, as analysis provides a space for opinion to be shared as staff are brought into the loop. Better engagement follows.

3. Improves employee retention
Employee retention is improved alongside feelings of participation and value in employees as your company invests in their team and the team is empowered.

4. Consistency
Training helps reduce knowledge gaps and disparities between your teams. Well trained employees find it easier to share responsibility as well as understanding their roles better.

5.  employee skills
Tracking training and development empowers you with a better understanding of the skills your team need – including knowledge gaps

6. Create a knowledge-sharing environment
Fostering a continuous learning environment creates a dynamic space for your team to learn from the leadership, as well as hard lessons and failures, to prepare for future success.

7. Happier customers
Better-trained, and more vested, employees make more productive team members, that serve your customers better, with customer retention increasing.
Providing teams with an open platform to share their experiences, failures, and successes helps your company evolve and become more efficient. Implemented solutions by the company or within the Regenerative space can then be collected into a central place allowing employees to always refer to previous practices getting new inspiration from others. As Human beings, we share an inherent desire to interact with peers to collaborate and co-create.
“We want to encourage our employees to become entrepreneurs, because people are not a means to an end; they are an end in themselves. Our goal is to let everyone become their own CEO, to help everyone fully realise their potential.”
Haier CEO, Zhang Ruimin

3. Empowered Participation: Intrapreneurship

The hallmark of Intrapreneurship includes the nurture of a start-up/innovation mindset within a corporate environment. Creating an intrapreneurial culture can be tricky, but it is also key if you want your organisation to be adaptive to change, and to build resiliency. Intrapreneurship facilitates interactions across silos and cuts across top-down as well as bottom-up approaches and supports the organic diffusion of innovative – and bold – ideas within the organisation. The attention given to creating, designing, and fostering an innovation culture helps companies to translate values into positive actions.
Such innovation cultures work best with appropriate rewards and incentives as well as a commitment to work to incorporate radical innovative projects back into the company from the company’s “innovation lab” - or design sprints - so that new initiatives are properly nurtured when adopted back into the structures of the business it is placed. In many corporate cultures without a strong culture or clear vision, intrapreneurs are often seen as corporate insurgents, in Regenerative businesses, they are more readily welcomed because Regenerative businesses usually already have a transformative and unifying culture.
The creation of dynamic workplaces represents a chance for SMEs to unleash team potential. Shifting from bureaucracy models implying heavy models of dependency between team members, the emergence of Humanocracy (Zanini, Hamel) opens up the doors for empowered participation and transparent governance. In order to do so, an emphasis should be given to team reflections and consultations ensuring that every single individual has a say in the decision-making process. Built on new principles, companies evolve away from established structures and become more like open laboratories where everyone can bring his/her part. Teams are self-managing, company-wide conversations help shape the strategy, coordination is achieved through partnerships, and roles are built around capabilities. The focus shifts towards finding the right balance between size and flexibility, efficiency and innovation, and control versus freedom. It is also advised that leaders encourage a culture that accepts failure and gives space to employees to take ownership of their ideas and the leigh-way – in appropriate circumstances - to turn their ideas into reality. Innovate with your organization’s core competencies and mission in mind, not all innovation ecosystems are created equally – it’s important to adapt your own for your own needs. A multi-stakeholder approach works best for Regenerative companies, working across silos both within and outside of the business - although Regenerative companies view relationships through a different lens than the transactional dynamics which usually govern such interactions. 

Case Study: Seventh Generation
Seventh Generation is an eco-cleaning products company that was founded by Jeffrey Hollander.  The company was founded with the goal of being a disruptive actor. They helped co-create a market for non-toxic cleaning products and encouraged their suppliers to collaborate to develop new formulas.  The company committed at an early stage to empowering staff to have the tools they needed to create the impact they committed to, and built a structure around supporting these micro-innovations, empowering leaders at every level. As they implemented this powerful strategy, they adopted the principle; ‘in every action, every day, work on developing yourself and others.” And, in order to create the kind of culture where the principle was front of mind,  Hollander developed a ritual of reaching out to people across the business every day to ask them if they had developed themselves or others that day. If they hadn’t he would refer colleagues to a resource to support them to become more developmental in their interactions. 

4. Empowered Participation: Distributed Decision-making

Regenerative businesses, in seeking “wholeness” tend towards distributed decision-making which is a hybrid of top-down and consensus decision-making. Here, there is a clear decision maker for each decision, though in this case, it’s not necessarily a leader or manager. Each decision is made by the person closest to the work and its impacts. In a distributed system the person taking the decision must seek out feedback and input a number of different people—but ultimately the decision rests with them. In this way, Regenerative businesses favour the principle of subsidiarity – that the very best decisions are dealt with at the most immediate (or local) level most consistent with their resolution. Usually, the leadership, before adopting a distributed decision-making approach, will empower the team with a constitution that sets out boundaries as well as responsibilities and roles. Ensuring workers’ dignity and valuing the voice of the team are key values that should be central to any Regenerative business. Adopting a distributive approach helps companies share knowledge and thrive with the support of all team members.

Distributed decision making in nature

Honeybee colonies can skilfully choose the best nectar sources by selectively exploiting the most profitable sources and rapidly shifting their foraging efforts to adapt to changes as they occur. Forager bees modulate their behaviour in relation to nectar source profitability. Each forager independently calculates the absolute potential of its source. Even though each of a colony's foragers operates with extremely limited information about the colony's food sources, together they will generate a coherent colony level response to different food sources in which better ones are heavily exploited and poorer ones are abandoned.  Meanwhile, the bees work as a collective with the Queen deciding which areas to target for example, although reaching consensus is a collaborative process which according to researchers, involves sharing diverse ideas. 

Empowered Participation: New Power

Inspired by the New Power book written by Jeremy Heimans and Henry Timms,  Regenerative businesses may adopt an enlightened perspective when it comes to reconciling the tension between  two distinct forces: old power and new power. If power is considered the ability to produce intended effects, then both old and new power go about this differently.
Old power works like a currency and is held by few who jealously guard it, with those who have the most leveraging it to control and influence. Old power is top-down, and it is used to download, and capture attention, behaviour and action.
New power operates much more like a current than a currency – it is open, participatory, and peer-driven, and sourced from the many, uploading, and distributing as it goes, much like the behaviour of water and electricity or in the case of a lightning storm. New power is predicated on the emergent capacity of the collective and its intention to participate in systems that are more expansive than those which are limited to the passive consumption of ideas and goods. 
Based on networks, collaboration, radical transparency, distributed decision making, and empowered participation, new forms of power are actionable, connected, and extensible. Using the SUCCESS model, the Heimans and Timms recommend stakeholders to focus on Simple, Unexpected, Concrete, Credible, Emotional actions using Storytelling.
Empowering a crowd to deliver Positive change starts with the identification of an influential target groups (connected connectors), the establishment  of a powerful narrative (creating a voice), powered by an ownerless agenda (co-owned by communities), facilitated by lower barriers to entry (which means it has in-built inclusivity), and is driven by  accessible participation (facilitated by online interconnectivity).

Case Study: DaVita 
Democracy Rules in Denver-based healthcare company DaVita has 50,000 staff and $12 billion in sales. Yet  this company is proving that even large companies can be democratic. Employees are known as “DaVita citizens”,  and are often called upon to vote on important issues. The CEO is also known as Mayor of the company and cites numerous issues where he has disagreed with the outcome of a vote but the vote has prevailed.
Case Study: Zappos
Online retailer Zappos, views democracy as crucial to their legendary customer service. They began a transition to "Holacracy" in 2013, deciding to ditch manager roles and job titles in favor of "self-management."The company views employee democracy as fundamental to the distribution of power, encouraging innovation, and  attracting the best talent. Every employee has the ability to make changes that impact how the organization operates, develops, and grows without having to get a manager or supervisor involved as long as they consult at least one other person.




 

5. Wholeness & Self-management

As with the Teal framework (Frederic Laloux), Regenerative businesses are based on three pillars named self-management, wholeness, and evolutionary purpose (discussed in the earlier chapter on right relationship). Human relationships are key when implementing change/impact. Any individual can become a changemaker if they are invited to contribute to an inclusive organisation with a framework of empowered participation.
The self-management principle is paradoxically dependent on high functioning peer to peer relationships that can emerge in the inclusive environments Regenerative companies hold the space for. Individuals and teams are provided with high autonomy and are also accountable for their domains. While power and control have traditionally played their part in many organisations, Regenerative companies need not be as constrained by the old dynamics of power play related to specific positions and top-down leadership. In recent years the boundaries that existed between living and working have been disappearing – a trend that has been magnified in the COVID-19 era. We bring one third of our lives to work, if we aim to be integrated personalities, we should be able to express ourselves in the work environment.
If individual wholeness is about being who we truly are, bringing the totality of our unique gifts and talents, and being fully expressed, then this may represent a challenge to work through for organisations. Regenerative work cultures strive to create a safe space for individual expressions of wholeness while working towards the wider interests of the company. This then becomes about bringing balance to the tension between the individual’s and the company’s needs as the company strives to fulfil its evolutionary purpose. By honouring wholeness at the level of our interpersonal relationships, we can strengthen the wholeness at the level of the corporate entity, and thus be a force for restoring wholeness at the meta, planetary level through expressing our purpose. 
In the Regenerative business, employees are encouraged to bring their whole selves to participate within a stimulating environment where individuals are invited to be fully expressed. By facilitating a high degree of freedom of expression. individuals can bring their whole selves for the benefit of the company. By doing so, this brings unprecedented levels of energy, passion, and creativity for employees to innovate without boundaries.  
“Sympathy will have been increased through natural selection, for those communities which include the greatest number of the most sympathetic members, would flourish best”    Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man
Case study: Raw Workshop

Positive founding member Raw Workshop produces very high-quality wooden furniture and provides a wood recycling service in the UK. The company was founded with a commitment to empower individuals through the production of top-quality materials. Employing highly qualified people with mental health issues, addiction, homelessness or criminality backgrounds as well as refugees, the company shows that everyone can be exceptional, not the exception. While being a leader in the field of circular economy, Raw Workshop also leads empowerment activities for young people at risk by supporting them with soft skills training during workshops and practical activities. By shining a light for an inclusive and efficient participation model, the company also delivers a strong message: “Every young person, no matter what they’ve been through or how life is today, has the potential to live a life beyond their expectations.”
 
6. Wellbeing

Wellbeing is a key pillar of the Regenerative economy. It is the means to the end and the end in itself. As a driver of fulfilment for individuals and society, the promotion of wellbeing can have an extremely large impact on bringing change into existing systems. As societal and environmental challenges multiply, we observe that our historic and singular focus on growth-based economics has been shown to be wanting. Growth has not brought happiness, nor equity, and our consumption economy is built around selling to our fears and insecurities, rather than fortifying our souls. Today, the economy does not serve either society or the environment, but rather the financial system. Reinventing our economy to serve both individuals’ and society’s best needs whilst protecting the environment from our worst excesses represents our greatest challenge yet – but one in which there are still significant business opportunities as we transition. Placing wellbeing at the heart of your company’s mission, culture and impact is one of the strongest possible drivers for Regenerative innovation.   Workplace wellbeing relates to all aspects of working life, from quality and safety, to how workers think and feel about their work and their place of work, the work culture and how they relate to the organisation. As a result, wellbeing is an important factor in determining an organisation's long-term effectiveness and Resilience.
 “Democracy gives us citizens a measure of political power. That power comes with a responsibility to foster a culture that makes it possible to live and work well together for the well-being of all.”    Diane Kalen-Sukra, author 
 
Wellbeing in the workplace

Individuals need to find their own space and to feel safe within their working environment so that they can feel confident enough to contribute fully.  Creating a wellbeing culture is important if your company is committed to its employees. Having a clear mission and purpose helps develop a sense of community encouraging employees to collaborate and push the boundaries of what is possible. Happiness at work has been recognised by psychologists as a major contributor to results. According to the British mental health charity Mind, 60 percent of workers say they’d feel more motivated and more likely to recommend their organisation as a good place to work if their employer took action to support mental wellbeing. By prioritizing the wellbeing of their employees, businesses can easily improve their impact. Touching upon the company culture and value, employee wellbeing provides collaborators with a strong incentive helping them to achieve more ambitious targets with more serenity. Fostering a working environment where wellbeing and compassion are paramount, and where people are managed with empathy and emotional intelligence is the ideal way to enable feelings of wholeness, and community.
 
Practical initiatives include;
Creating a culture of openness
Fostering work-life balance
Creating opportunities for two-way communication and dialogue
Setting up peer to peer support, mentorship, and buddy systems
Invite employees and teams to participate in decision-making
Positive working relationships – encouraging team-work and better collaboration
Treating people as individuals and encouraging them to bring their whole-selves
Creating a safe and happy work environment which is comfortable and inspiring
 
Case study: Mindwalk Yoga

Positive founding member Mindwalk Yoga is a social enterprise on a mission to reach diverse people with yoga-therapy for the treatment of anxiety, stress and trauma delivered via online classes, tailored courses and practice-at-home videos. Helping professionals to overcome stress issues, self-manage their symptoms, and reduce anxiety, the company offers a series of comprehensive courses with evidence-based outcomes. Due to everyday stresses, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, many people need positive support to help them regain a sense of wellness again and to feel happy. Yoga-therapy-for-anxiety is an accessible and effective method for restoring wellbeing. 

Case study: Mindfulness at Work
Positive founding member Mindfulness at Work is passionate about helping enable people and businesses to be more successful and happier. Working with highly respected mindfulness experts, Mindfulness at Work offers training programmes for the workplace – to make it a more productive, creative, fulfilling and enjoyable place to be. The company proposes workplace programmes, public courses, as well as mindfulness coaching. Equipping individuals with the right skills, Mindfulness at work helps to enhance decision making, increase communication impact, foster team building, encourage creativity and innovation, improve engagement and confidence, as well as promote positive wellbeing. 

 
7.  Governance
Governance plays a crucial role in shaping and regulating companies’ behaviour. Regenerative companies have activities that respect the planetary boundaries and serve human needs. Governance plays an important role when taking into consideration these important social and environmental concerns, as well as providing structure, accountability and predictability to the ongoing business. The starting point is a good set of mission, vision and values and a clear purpose from which to build from.
In Regenerative models, good governance should enable a system where all company actors can participate and influence the organisation’s goals. In most linear models, it is often the case that so many unreconciled agendas exist that many employees are not really entirely aligned behind a common perspective. These hierarchies and roles more often bind individuals to cooperate with their peers. Top-down systems where leaders maintain control over the business strategy deny the value of collaboration as well as the wholeness of individuals and what they can bring as part of an interconnected system. In linear structures, ownership and influence are mostly centralised to a limited number of decision-makers having the overall control on the company activities. This can negatively impact employees, as they are excluded from decision-making processes. This tendency often jeopardizes team cohesion and the feelings of ownership each employee would normally have while working for a purpose-driven company. The usual result of such approaches endangers companies’ stability and integrity. Leaders who try to assert or reassert overall control over the whole system negatively influence the capability for companies to rebalance their equilibrium.
In order to be Regenerative, leaders need to adapt to their teams and provide their staff with inclusive participation opportunities. By building capacity within teams and facilitating opportunities for dialogue and participation, and encouraging distributed decision-making, teams consciously implement decisions they have participated in with full ownership. By doing so, people are self-managing and self-initiating actions that benefit the company community. As empowered leaders of change, teams can actively participate in shaping companies’ strategic direction and supporting goals. 
In Regenerative organisations, companies address human aspiration for co-creation and participation. Compelled by their companies’ mission, employees should benefit from a focus on creating appropriate structures, systems, and processes that have been tailored to the needs of each organisation and its particular culture and mission. This contrasts with conventional organisations which are built around more static old power strategies. Regenerative business structures are set up in order to develop individuals’ capabilities so that the organisation can deliver its greatest positive impact whilst serving the highest possible outcome for all. Regenerative businesses tend more towards models of stewardship.
Case study: DatHappy

Positive founding member DatHappy is a social enterprise accelerating purpose-driven organisations´ innovation & growth and leveraging the data economy for a positive impact. The company aims to help social innovators, to better use technology and data as a  resource to positively impact the world. Pioneering in the field of governance, DatHappy uses an horizontal model redistributing equal power to each of their remote partners based all over the world. DatHappy’s partnership model (the company has no employees) allows partners to execute their tasks in a decentralized ecosystem from business development to project realization. Every partner can be play their part in various projects and workstreams, with a clearly defined role which has no hierarchy of people, helping partners to align with the overall objectives of DatHappy. Leading projects in Brazil and Nigeria, DatHappy works with local partners based in those locations to create a symbiotic impact delivering collective goals and outcomes. 

Case study: RiverSimple

Riversimple is a UK purpose-driven company pursuing , systematically, the elimination of the environmental impact of personal transport.  The company produces the Rasa car (Tabula Rasa means ‘Clean slate’ in Latin). Powered by a hydrogen fuel cell, the Riversimple car is a unique innovation for mobility. Giving a crucial importance to governance, the company has created a unique governance system with six custodians representing a part of model life elements. From the Environment, the Customers (Users), the Community (Neighbours), the Staff, the Investors and the Commercial Partners, Riversimple aims to give a bigger picture of the whole while facilitating decision making. The company calls its model a “Stakeholder Guardian model of governance”.

Questions

To what extent does the structure of your company empower employees? 
How do you encourage your peers to ideate, propose, and implement innovative ideas?
How do you make sure that all employees (and future hires) have equal rights and opportunities?
How could you improve training and knowledge sharing fostering your company purpose?
What are you proposing to your team in order to ensure their wellbeing at work?
How do you promote your company's purpose and vision to team members?
What is your governance model and how does it benefit all your companies’ employees?
How are you embedding the planet, people, places, and partners in your governance model?
To what extent can you reconcile  power and symmetry between investors and employees in terms of decision-making and participation?



Chapter 9: Empowering Communities (PLACES)
1. Understanding Communities and Places
“Each human community consists of a mosaic of peoples, traditions, beliefs, and institutions uniquely shaped by long-term pressures of geography, human history, culture, local environment, and changing human needs. Honouring this fact, a Regenerative Economy nurtures healthy and resilient communities and regions, each one uniquely informed by the essence of its individual history and place. This principle poses a profound challenge to the modern global corporation, but forward-thinking leaders are already moving toward a more distributed management structure connected to place.”   John Fullerton                                                                       
Postmodern times are defined by the way we relate - as individuals - to our network of influences, through real and virtual relationships, these help to shape who we become. As we evolve, our identity is defined to a large extent by our relationships. The people we have relationships with, and the shared culture of the communities we participate in, are indicators of who we are.  Accordingly, communities hold a lot of potential for a 21st Century human being, as they influence both our identity and our lifestyles. From the quality of our natural environment, to available leisure facilities, parks and sporting venues, learning establishments and opportunities, to law and enforcement, local history and heritage, our spiritual connections, the places we congregate and have fun with our friends, our local food culture, and traditions, community brings a never ending list of the benefits, and impacts that enriches our lives.  Each one of us lives somewhere. As digital-oriented as our lives may be, we are all part of a place, where we belong. And as such, we are called to be responsible members of the communities we live in. It’s up to us to decide how we play it -this is the purview of each individual. Just as this is also the responsibility of each business. 
Whilst the explosion of social media has had huge benefits, we are only now beginning to identify some of the widespread side-effects. The historical decline of traditional social structures has further destabilized communities, leaving individuals to find their own identity, often detached and disconnected from the places they inhabit. Though on the plus side, because of our digitally interconnected world, we can also participate in other connected communities that connect over large geographical areas but who unite around common interests and shared beliefs, challenges, perspectives, ethnicity, sexuality etc. The digital era has therefore both challenged and expanded our understanding of what a community is.   
“There is no power for change greater than a community discovering what it cares about.”   Margaret J. Wheatley
Physical places can often be likened to the “hardware” of a community. They reflect the way a human population has settled somewhere, appropriating and shaping each area. Man-made infrastructure and facilities such as roads, boundaries, bridges, fields systems, ditches and ponds, woods and parks, mills, houses and temples, define the specific relationship between a population and the world: defensive/aggressive, open/closed, expansive/decreasing, and conservative/adaptative. Communities exist in dynamic relationships with the bioregions they inhabit. The words ‘places’ and ‘ecosystems’ can often be interchangeable. Whilst collaboration is the highest state of social interactions, symbiosis is recognized as an elevated state of biodiversity. As we seek a healthier, more Regenerative relationship with the communities and places we interact with, it is important we are mindful of what makes each place special and unique. It is paramount that we pay particular attention to the unique history, culture, heritage and vernacular of each place – framed against the backdrop of the local nature, making sure to minimize our footprint as we go, and taking care about how we impact and engage with the place’s natural environment, as well as the local plant and animal life, with a view to restoring the depleted natural systems human activity has negatively impacted, and applying the boy scout campsite of rule of  always leaving a place better than we found it.

 Case Study: The Regenerative Resources Company (RRC)
RRC works with landholders, governments, institutions, communities, and tribes, to transform degraded landscapes into regenerative, circular economies.They offer ‘transformation as a service.’They discovered that, as traditional livelihoods fail, rural communities are forced to degrade their environment to survive -a major driver of desertification, deforestation, and rural-urban flight.  The company is therefore reversing this  pattern by designing and creating systems that bind rural wealth to ecological function while honoring local cultures and customs. RRC guides this transformation hand-in-hand with local stakeholders, by providing design, training & education and other services. The company’s flexible approach ensures that solutions are tailored to the most local level. They also offer companies carbon sequestration through mangrove afforestation, the most efficient and highest capacity terrestrial ecology on the planet for sequestering carbon (mangtoves are 50 times more effective than tropical rainforests)


2. Bioregion
A useful definition from the World Resources Institute:“A bio-region is a land and water territory whose limits are defined not by political boundaries, but by the geographical limits of human communities and ecological systems. Such an area must be large enough to maintain the integrity of the region’s biological communities, habitats, and ecosystems; to support important ecological processes, such as nutrient and waste cycling, migration, and stream flow; to meet the habitat requirements of keystone and indicator species; and to include the human communities involved in the management, use, and understanding of biological resources.  It must be small enough for local residents to consider it home. A bioregion would typically embrace thousands to hundreds of thousands of hectares.  It may be no bigger than a small watershed or as large as a small state or province.  In special cases, a bioregion might span the borders of two or more countries. A bioregion is also defined by its people. It must have a unique cultural identity and be a place in which local residents have the primary right to determine their own development.  This primary right does not, however, imply an absolute right. Rather, it means that the livelihoods, claims, and interests of local communities should be both the starting point and the criteria for regional development and conservation.  Within that framework many other state, investor, and other economic interests must be accommodated. Within a bioregion lies a mosaic of land or aquatic uses.  Each patch provides habitats in which different species survive and flourish, and each has its own particular relationship to the region’s human population.  All the elements of the mosaic are interactive; the management of a watershed affects riverine habitats, farms, estuaries, fisheries, and coral reefs.  The components are also dynamic; each changes over time as rivers change course, fallow fields regenerate, storms batter coasts, and fires ravage forests.  This dynamism gives a well-managed bioregion the Resilience and flexibility to adapt to natural evolution and human-induced activity—be it changing climate or changing markets. Within this ecological and social framework, governmental, community, corporate, and other private interests share responsibility for coordinating land-use planning for both public and private land and for defining and implementing development options that will ensure that human needs are met in a sustainable way.”
 
Case Study: Avène
For several years the French dermo-cosmetic brand Avène has engaged in an eco-responsible initiative to raise awareness about the impact of sun protection on the marine life and corals. They partnered with a local conservation group to preserve and regenerate marine ecosystems in Pejarakan, Bali. Since its start in 2016, 24 artificial reefs were immersed underwater, with 1855 corals, from more than 15 species, under the auspices of a program of mangrove reforestation. The project included the planting of timber and fruit trees around the village in order to improve soil retention, enhance water quality and provide an alternative income source for villagers.
 
Case Study: Ambiance Bois
Ambiance Bois is a sawmill based in in Faux-la-Montagne (France) that at first glance looks like any other. However, wood is responsibly sourced from local forests. The company is employee-run. The team is versatile: in the sense that they rotate roles daily. Whatever their job, and regardless of length of service, everyone gets exactly the same hourly wage: slightly above the minimum wage with health insurance covered. Most employees choose to work part-time, and the company encourages and supports employees who wish to use their free time to support the local community. Every decision is taken by consensus. The CEO is drawn by lot every two years. Half of the profits are shared amongst the shareholders, the other half goes back to the employees.


3. Reinventing Relationship with Place
Reconciling tensions between globalization & localization
This most recent stage of globalization has brought many advantages with today’s world more interconnected than ever before, following centuries of intensifying international trade, and the last 30 years characterized by supply chains spread out over many countries and continents.  At the same time, late stage capitalism has favoured a winner takes all predatory approach that seeks the cheapest labour, resources, and manufacturing inputs, at the expense of worker’s rights, wages, conditions - with scant regard to environmental concerns.   
The Black Lives Matter movement has more recently shone a new light on globalized capitalism’s painful history of colonialism, slavery and exploitation. This trajectory has accounted for subjugated and displaced populations, genocides, political and religious indoctrination, and the wholesale destruction and commodification of nature, with the consequent devastation of numerous ecosystems. Slavery without question represents one of the darkest and most painful chapters of recent history, though there are also examples of the excessive force being applied to displace local populations from self-reliant communities in a number of western countries including the Highland Clearances in Scotland.  Here entire populations were uprooted and displaced as their lands were confiscated and ‘forfeited’ to the crown and the great Scottish estates. Across the Atlantic, in the Americas, it is estimated some 20m native Americans were killed as their lands were confiscated. Indigenous people in Australia hardly fared much better, continuing to be classified by the state as flora and fauna (i.e subhuman and without rights) until the 1960s.  As Captain Cook claimed Australia, the British Empire used a legal artifice to designate the nation as ‘Terra Nulis’ or ‘no man’s land’ because in their hubris the British didn’t feel the need to negotiate a treaty with the indigenous inhabitants, whose natural title may go back 400,000 years as one of the most ancient cultures on Earth.
Today, globalized capitalism’s command and control mindset – at once dominating, forceful, invasive and exploitative –is arguably more subtly expressed in the form of dictated terms of trade and investment, enforced by the letter of the law. The law is still very much a top-down tool used to lay down the rules of engagement and make it extremely challenging for emerging economies to catch up or move beyond current levels of socio-economic development, limiting them for the most part to the export of raw materials.  
The institutions upholding the standards of economic globalisation, including the IMF and World Bank, present a singular argument for development:  that the only way to advance the welfare of human populations in developing nations is to reduce trade barriers and open their economies to multinational corporations. Today even the most respected multinational companies (MNCs) behave like modern day Elizabethan pirates. These same MNCs are largely unregulated and subvert local tax rules in order to shift profits offshore. Some $2.1trillion from Fortune 500 companies alone and $21 trillion total (Forbes). Meanwhile, many of these same MNCs exhibit worrying monopolistic behaviours wiping out competition and buying political favours to avoid legal challenge. Indeed, many Fortune 500 companies are now bigger than countries.
Companies have become entities, with personalities, power, opinions, beliefs, rights and duties. They also have legal personality.  As such, they are members of their communities. No question that businesses, like people, must find a way to live in harmony with the communities and places they engage with. In order to do so, we must reframe our economic relationships, and reshape the nature of how we relate to and ultimately impact the communities and places we interact with. Regenerative businesses embrace this important principle, and in honouring community and place also commit to fiscal transparency and fair tax. 
Decolonizing our mindsets
We have entered a critical new phase where we have exceeded the limits of growth on a finite planet and our current model of globalization and its winner-takes-all playbook of wealth extraction for the few must be replaced by a healthier and saner model that works for the planet – and the many. As we reimagine our economic and business models we must ask, what degree of standardization is acceptable? Technology has brought unparalleled levels of interconnectivity.  Most of us are in favour of sharing technology and resources, yet the struggle is real: how do we protect and preserve the rich cultural identities, assets and heritage of local communities whilst opening them up to the benefits of an interconnected world? There are no clear answers, yet one thing is clear, as we enter the Anthropocene era we must strengthen localization wherever we can. Reconnecting with place means redefining our relationship with place and the environment, and decolonizing our mindsets from exploitation to stewardship, and from ownership to belonging. 
“If you look at the whole picture, it is overwhelming and terrifying, but if you work on your little part of the jigsaw and know that people all over the world are working on their little bits, that's what will give you hope.”  Jane Goodall
 
Localization
Localization is about re-scaling the economy back to a human level whereby the goods and services a community needs are produced locally and regionally whenever possible. Examples of localization include; co-operatives, credit unions, community gardens, local veg boxes. Localization has a number of benefits;
 
·       strengthening community cohesion
·       greater health and material wellbeing
·       reduced pollution and better environmental health
·       socio-economic Resilience
 
Local economies are successful because they are comprised of networks of place-based relationships that positively affirm our desire for deeper connection with each other and the earth. When communities are strengthened by these local structures, networks, friends, neighbours, and members of the community, can ensure that caring for one another and for their environment are guiding principles in the fulfilment of their everyday life. Research has consistently highlighted the importance of strong social bonds and healthy relationships as a pillar of happiness. Participating in the community is a powerful way for people to deepen those connections. Membership in a community is a force multiplier in that regard.
“Localization is a process whereby people reclaim their rights - and it is already happening from the bottom up – to establish production, retailing and consumption on a more human scale. People insist that the businesses that they rely on need to be place-based, that they belong to a country and adhere to the rules of that country….”                                                            Helena Norberg-Hodge, Local Futures
 
Glocalization is a hybrid of "globalization" and "localization" and is normally used to describe a product/service that is distributed globally and adjusted for local markets. Thinking global/acting local can also be applied to global challenges such as biodiversity loss.
 
‘If (we) would seek comfort in the whole, (we) must learn to discover the whole in the smallest part.’          Goethe
 
Regenerative businesses seek to establish roots in their local communities:  they listen to what the places are trying to tell them as they seek to better understand, serve and honour, the places they belong to, in their own special, unique and appropriate way – having a restorative impact on local biodiversity and the nature of a place from a whole systems perspective.
 Case Study: The Co-operative
The Co-operative movement began in 1844 in Rochdale  when a  few local people got together to start a society that would treat the local people with respect and provide affordable food for all. Today, the Co-operative Group encompasses  a diverse family of retail businesses including food retail; e-pharmacy; insurance; legal services and funeralcare, and is spread out over 3,700 locations. It is the largest consumer co-operative in the UK and owned by more than 4.6 million active membersMembership is open to everyone, provided they agree to subscribe £1 sterling in the capital of the society and share the values and principles upon which the group was founded. Members are democratically involved in setting business strategy, decide how social goals are achieved, and share in its profits – in 2018, £79m was returned to members and their chosen local community causes via the Co-op Community Fund which favours local charities and causes. This is supported by 1% levied on profits from local stores.


Case Study: The People’s Energy Company
People’s Energy was launched in 2017 to provide a more ethical alternative to the ‘Big Six’ suppliers. They now have more than 180,000 customers across the UK, with all electricity coming from 100 per cent renewable sources. The company returns 75% of its profits to domestic customers through an annual rebate and last week became the UK’s only community interest company energy supplier – putting social objectives ahead of maximising profit for shareholders. In 2020, the company partnered with the local authority where they are headquartered, East Lothian Council, to tackle energy poverty.  In East Lothian, it is estimated that almost a quarter of households – 22% – are living in fuel poverty, equating to 13,500 homes.  By introducing a new affordable tariff for East Lothian residents, this new joint venture is geared up to reduce the fuel poverty gap in the area.

4. Unlocking Local Value
“In both the Global North and South, local economies not only help ensure greater job security, prosperity and income equality, they also provide the framework needed to support strong communities, which in turn support the health of the individual – both psychologically and physically. Ultimately, localization renews our connections – to one another, to our communities, to the living world around us. It satisfies our deep longing for purpose and belonging, and for a secure future for ourselves and our children.”  Helena Norberg-Hodge
As value creators, businesses have a special responsibility to communities. Regenerative businesses, by their very nature, can be powerful catalysts for transformational change by unlocking the intrinsic value of places. Approaches that empower communities go beyond the “charity” approach of traditional corporate social responsibility programs where commitments are transactional i.e. in order to compensate the disruption that a new business might cause in terms of traffic, noise, etc. Moreover, honouring community and place relates to a shift in perception of a company’s fundamental relationships and an acceptance of its role within the interconnected web of life. Once again, this relates to questions of wholeness and self-expression of the organization showing up in its fullness as an integral part of a community. Positive businesses understand the importance of their role within communities and endeavour to employ as much as they can from the locality. As Regenerative businesses reframe their relationships from a position of wholeness, wholeness of community and place emerges in symbiosis.
Regenerative businesses;
-Engage around shared value and purpose: as shared values mean stronger cohesion
-Build Partnerships: because work across silos and radical collaboration means deeper impact
-Respect uniqueness of place & culture: factoring-in local biodiversity, vernacular &  heritage
-Work with local narratives: to reinforce collective identity with place-based storytelling
-Enable connectedness:  as higher levels of interconnectivity mean deeper collaboration
-Build trust: because consistently good actors build trust with stronger community relationships
 -Listen deeply & have regular interactions: frequent is best – face to face  & digital
 
Organizing around four pillars for empowering communities and places;
-Care: honour and respect the uniqueness of each place and community with compassion
-Facilitate: forge grassroots partnerships and nurture collective intelligence
-Foster Resilience: empower people to respond quickly to change and adversity
-Inspire innovation:  support solutions that are tailored to unmet needs
 
5. Intrinsic Value of Nature
Nature is a gigantic service provider, providing for all that we need to sustain life and much more – she is also a vast library yet to be discovered. Marine biologist Boris Worm estimated that there are roughly 7.8 million species of animals; 300,000 plants; 600,000 fungi; 36,000 protozoa and 28,000 chromists (including algae). While more than 70% of plants have been identified, only a small fraction of 12 % of the animal kingdom has been discovered. Meanwhile, recent data from Indiana University suggests there may be 1 trillion microscopic species of life on earth, suggesting we have not even identified 99.999% of our biodiversity.
 
6th Greatest Extinction: A man-made tragedy
Scientists have observed a devastating mass extinction event is unfolding today — the sixth of its kind in Earth's history. A combination of  hotter oceans, deforestation, and climate change, are devastating species, which are being reduced in unprecedented numbers. According to a 2014 study, extinction rates are 1,000 times higher than they would be without human impacts, and found that up to 1 million plant and animals species now face extinction, due to human activity, within our lifetimes. This requires urgent collective action. In the UK alone, diversity has been reduced some 41% since the 1500s, with some species like the hedgehogs now endangered (down from 30m in the 1950s to 1m today).
Nature as a source of disruptive innovation

Nature is also an endless source of inspiration and disruptive innovation. Thousands of drugs have been created using the source material and genome of plants and microbes.  Many others species provide the “bio-inspiration” and “bio-mimicry” lending their blueprints for products. Often, there is no need to harvest these species but only provide a few specimens so that the source material is taken for analysis and solutions are built in the lab. Innovations include fire detection inspired by charcoal beetles, clinical compounds from scorpions used to treat brain cancers and snake venom with anti-blood clotting properties. Indigenous peoples also inspire innovation; after observing the use of curare in poison darts used by the Huaorani tribe of Ecuador to hunt prey, scientists realized the poison also proved extremely useful as an anaesthetic. Similarly, after observing Central Africa’s Pygmy tribes’ healers use the Tabernanthe Iboga plant for its powerful healing properties, the derivative Ibogaine is now used to treat trauma and PTSD. More recently bio-mimicry has become a huge influence in robotics, from leaping locust inspired robots to the astonishing new field of “soft robots” modelled on tentacles, caterpillars and worms.  Yet our innovations have only uncovered the tip of a vast iceberg. Earth is Nature’s own laboratory, with 3.7bn years of evolution and testing resulting in an endless supply of highly efficient solutions.
Jugaad
Frugal innovation - also known as Jugaad in Hindi - is an approach from which companies could benefit from. This is how Indian communities come up with ingenious solutions to complex solutions with extremely limited resources. One such frugal innovation is the MittiCool clay refrigerator, designed by an Indian potter, after the 2001 Gujarat earthquake. The MittiCool performs exactly like a traditional fridge, without electricity or  creating hazardous waste at the end of its life cycle. Another example is the use of banana leaves, as a biodegradable alternative to single-use plastic for use in disposable cups, plates and bags.

 
Case Study: Sea2see
Positive founding member, Sea2see collaborates with fishing communities in 27 ports of Spain and 10 coastal areas of Ghana in order to collect discarded marine plastic waste made up of fishing nets, rope, lines, and bottles.  The UPSEA waste collection program is active in Ghana and Senegal where coastal waste collection was inexistent. They give value to this discarded waste and reward the fishermen for what they collect, with a direct impact both on the environment and by empowering their communities. 150 containers have been placed in 27 Spanish ports in order to collect discarded plastic waste. They collect on average 500 kg. per day.  90% of what is collected will be recycled. Only 25% of the polymer collected can be used to manufacture glasses. Plastic waste is then up-cycled into a reusable raw material certified by the highest possible circular standards: UPSEA™ PLAST Cradle to Cradle™ Gold Certified.
 
Case Study: Aravind
Aravind, with its mission to ‘eliminate needless blindness’, provides large volume, high quality and affordable care. 50% of its patients receive services either free of cost or at steeply subsidised rates, yet the organisation remains financially self-sustainable. Much importance is given to equity – ensuring that all patients are accorded the same high quality care and service, regardless of their economic status. Patients can pay a zero-price if they choose.  High patient volume brings with it the benefits of economies of scale. Aravind’s unique assembly-line approach increases productivity tenfold. Over 450,000 eye surgeries and procedures are performed every year at Aravind, making it one of the largest eye-care providers in the world. Aravind has handled more than 56m outpatient visits and more than 6m surgeries. Aravind is a model for India, and the rest of the world. Today, Aravind operates a growing network of eye care facilities, a postgraduate institute, a management training and consulting institute, an ophthalmic manufacturing unit, a research institute and  eye banks. Aravind’s eye care facilities include 13 eye hospitals, 6 outpatient eye examination centres and 75 primary eye care facilities in Southern India.
6. Measuring Social Impact
 Social impact measurement is a process to help ascertain how much social change has been created as a result of an organization's activities. The credibility of the process is usually driven by a clearly worded impact statement accompanied by a focused impact-driven, stakeholder-focused strategy laid out in a Theory of Change.  Social impact measurement is often confused with data collection, impact assessment and impact reporting, although it is not the same. This could be helpful whether analysing and weighing up the value of programming decisions or informing funding decisions. When companies quantify social impact, having the right data at hand can inform the decision-making process. In this way we can use social impact measurement as a key tool for the Regenerative economy, in order to establish and scale best practice.  But it can also facilitate the necessary shift in public policy, providing strategic data to orientate action in support of job creation, energy transition, investment potential, and much more. 
SoPact is a social enterprise which has created an impact measurement and management platform to help others measure their impact. They provide recommendations to turn qualitative surveys and quantitative data sets to meaningful material for social impact analysis and strategy.
In order to build a solid strategy for social impact measurement, they recommend:
Balancing qualitative and quantitative indicators
Analysing the context of the measured impact 
Using social networks, and creating hashtags to create measurable data
Having transparent metrics and calculation processes
Aligning with the Global Goals

Case Study: Sunfunder
SunFunder provides innovative debt financing for solar enterprises working in emerging and frontier markets. They collaborate with major debt fund investors around the world to unlock capital for solar energy projects in sub-Saharan Africa and beyond. They have partnered with investors including development finance institutions, impact investors, family offices, foundations, high net worth individuals and other institutional investors. They invest in solar energy companies across Africa and other regions that need debt financing to scale. They help companies that are active in the off-grid, residential, productive use, mini-grid and commercial and industrial solar sectors. These companies range from established global players to early-stage pioneers. They’ve helped 7 million people gain improved access to solar energy, empowering lives and businesses with clean, affordable energy. They claim to have saved 700,000+ tons of CO2 - equivalent emissions equivalent to 152,000 cars per year. SunFunder was the first investor to endorse the GOGLA Consumer Protection Code. They require that their borrowers have Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) policies in place – and help them implement them if they don’t.

Questions

 

Chapter 10: Value for All (PARTNERS)

1. Understanding Value for All 
“In the long history of humankind (and animal kind, too) those who learned to collaborate and improvise most effectively have prevailed.”― Charles Darwin
In 1970, Milton Friedman famously argued that the only social responsibility of business was to maximize profit. Consequently, late stage (financialized) capitalism has had an almost myopic focus on shareholder returns, at the expense of other stakeholders, including the environment. This approach has led to distortions and a lack of equilibrium within the system with perverse feedback loops as this winner-takes-all logic of the free market was taken to its ultimate conclusion with critical living systems being severely degraded on our finite planet with its limited resources.  A consumer economy with a relentless focus on selling goods and services with no intrinsic value has promoted a cult of self and separation above all else, no surprise then that Margaret Thatcher, one of the free market’s greatest proponents would go on to say that there is no such thing as society. In America in the 1950s executive salaries averaged a multiple of 20x average take-home pay, today they are 400x that, with perks and shareholder options further inflating that differentia and the wealthiest eight men in the world now own more than half of the world’s population together. The arrival of COVID-19 has exposed this everyman-is-an-island separation mentality, as today’s hyper-globalized world clearly exposed the fallacy behind this worldview, illustrating that we are only as strong as our weakest link. Similarly, we can only face our looming climate issues and global environmental crises as a collective, by embracing systemic change. In response, the Regenerative economy is predicated on the notions of holistic wealth and shared value. As Regenerative businesses connect to the world from a position of wholeness, they seek out collaborative relationships with their partners, customers, prosumers, and communities. By engaging partners from a place of wholeness, we move beyond the exploitative dynamics of late capitalism towards an economy based on healthy relationships that link up and lift up. Business value is not just about growth rates or financial capital, but a combination of different currencies, and a series of complex interdependent relationships. 
Prosumers
The term prosumer is a mashup of the terms producer and consumer and is indicative of the trend to a more diversified, participative and Regenerative economy.  We are moving away from the push-pull linear dynamics of buyers and sellers in a marketplace. A prosumer was originally defined as a person who consumes as well as produces a product.  For example, people who produce electricity by installing solar panels on their roofs are prosumers. Today the meaning of prosumer has been expanded to mean “professional consumers.” This includes influencers talking about  products on social media. Their engagement can help shape the success of a product or service. In  Regenerative businesses, prosumers can play a significant role (as investors, producers, and avocates) to support the company fulfil its purpose. 
Moving beyond multi-stakeholder theory
Multi-stakeholder theory is a theory of organizational management and business ethics that accounts for multiple constituencies impacted by business entities like employees, suppliers, local communities, creditors, and others. This is a useful approach for reordering relationships.  That said, because Regenerative businesses understand their place within a web of nested systems, and seek to express “wholeness” at the micro, meso and macro levels they seek to transcend this framework of  transactional dynamics.







Different Forms of Capital
With such a holistic approach, Regenerative businesses are richer, more complex and more dynamic. Here are some other forms of wealth you may be overlooking;
Financial - The capitalist market is driven principally by financial capital, above all others.
Material - These assets begin as raw materials and are extracted for production.
Natural - The life that sustains us; plants, animals, water, air, soil etc.
Social - Interpersonal connections, and networks, are the currency of this form of capital.
Cultural - symbols, ideas & preferences that can be strategically used as resources in social action.
Intellectual - Knowledge you possess, acquire, & exchange i.e. powering global education
Human - the economic value of the abilities and qualities of labor that influence productivity
Spiritual - How you view yourself and your place in the universe – this is beyond religion
Health - Refers to a satisfactory measure of the overall health of an organization and its team
Psychological - Resources that can be used to improve performance including hope and Resilience

2.  From Supply Chains to Value Webs and Cycles   
Definition of Regenerative Sourcing 
To contribute to a Regenerative economy, procurement needs to incentivise spending that delivers on three needs:
 1. Generates net-zero GHG emissions globally (may entail offsetting for some for a period)
2. Restores ecosystems, including net-increasing biodiversity in several key biomes;
3. Provides inclusive, safe and fair livelihoods for all     
Against the backdrop of mounting disappointment that Sustainability practices have not been delivering the kind of progress needed to address concerns, procurement has been recognized as a significant leverage point to deliver social and environmental change. Businesses that commit to positive social and environmental impact appreciate that this commitment extends beyond the four walls of their organisations. Whereas procurement officers used to have a narrow focus on price, there is a growing awareness of the huge opportunity they have to impact suppliers’ behaviours so that they are aligned with social and environmental impact and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from procurement.   
Moving from a linear world view of supply chains to a circular one of value webs
Presently, the “customer-supplier” dynamic is based on a “take-make-waste” model. Pressures on the environment necessitate a more cyclical model where supply chain purchasing decisions can be expanded to take account of climate, ecosystems and community impacts. Unless we can transform how we make our purchasing decisions, the ecological systems that support life on earth will ultimately collapse as our economic system breaches the safe operating space of planetary boundaries. Regenerative businesses adopt the best solutions taking into account the whole system (in terms of their partners, planet, people and the places they impact) when designing their products and services. Regenerative businesses choose suppliers that share a convergent purpose - or are aligned with that purpose.
5  Keys to Regenerative procurement

1.In-source the responsibility to regenerate.
Out-sourcing negative impacts as externalities is bad. Investing in suppliers is key for building a net positive future. This requires a new mindset with a holistic worldview.
 
2.Integrate strategic objectives into sourcing.
Ensure procurement objectives work in tandem with ecological and community impacts for the whole business to embed responsibility, create Resilience and become Regenerative.
 
3.Think cycles and webs, not chains.
Stop seeing your supply chain as links in a chain, view your system as cyclical. Aligning relationships, contracts and incentives can have transformative impacts.
 
3. Shift incentives and culture.
Shifting from a linear “cost reduction” to a cyclical “value creation” mindset means systemic /cultural change. Teams need to be incentivised to prioritise social and environmental outcomes – alongside financial goals – and rewarded for doing so.

5. Give the business model a reality check.
Procurement is an essential element of any organisation’s existence. Sourcing should support and enhance the way organisations create value. If the current business model is not designed to encourage this then, while implementing the best possible practices, it may be time to revisit the model itself.
 
 
Regenerative sourcing
Regenerative sourcing means factoring in human, animal and environmental wellness, having a net zero carbon impact, a restorative relationship with natural systems and an inclusive one with humans involved in procurement i.e. by paying fair wages, being transparent and inclusive regarding decisions impacting suppliers and partners. In regard to forestry this could involve selective tree harvesting whilst protecting the integrity of the forest.
Good materials
Good materials avoid resource depletion and minimize carbon emissions whilst doing no harm to people or the environment such as bamboo, tencel, linen, mycelium and cork which are renewable and biodegradable and require less energy to create. Regenerative models take into account a material's embodied energy – the amount of energy needed to create it, from procurement to processing and refinement. Regenerative manufacturing works to reduce embodied energy and transform environmental impacts.
End of cycle materials/reverse logistics
Reverse logistics systems re-utilize/recycle products and materials at the end of their life-cycle/purpose. This type of system is also known as a circular or closed-loop system. End of cycle products are returned to the manufacturer, to be broken down and disposed of as waste or to be repurposed into a new product.
 
Good transportation & logistics
The transportation and logistics of goods is an obvious contributor to greenhouse gas emissions. Regenerative businesses use renewable sources and alternative fuels where possible and naturally favour local suppliers and manufacturers, procuring materials from fewer sources. Products and packaging are designed with this in mind.
 
 
Case Study: Teemill
Less than 1% of material used to produce clothing is recycled into new clothing, 3 out of 5 t-shirts bought today end up in the bin. 84% of clothes end up being incinerated or in landfill: a garbage truck of clothes ends up in landfill every second, representing an annual material loss of USD 100 billion and huge negative environmental impacts. Teemill turns old t-shirts into new ones, regenerating natural systems. Their approach starts by viewing the fashion supply chain as a connected system. Teemill have opened up their platform so thousands of brands can produce t-shirts in real time and made-to-order, recycled and remade when they’re worn out.
 
Case Study: In’Bo
Positive founding member In’Bo is a sports gear and eyewear company making designed bamboo bicycles, surfboards, skis and glasses that are distributed in more than 550 opticians all over France. The company chose bamboo because of its flexibility and environmental impact and are also based in rural France in a tiny village of 250 where they make a positive impact in the community as one of the largest employers in the area.
 
Case Study: Houself
Positive founding member Houself is an eco-construction company based in the south of France which promotes the reuse/recycling of construction materials. They offer a variety of different services including; designing and construction of eco-homes and biodynamic gardens, and thermal performance studies. They choose partnerships with local suppliers of recycled and second-hand construction materials to minimize their environmental footprint. This approach combines eco-efficiency with reduced prices because of the reuse/recycle approach.
 
3.  Human Rights & Fair Trade
Regenerative companies consider the human rights risks along their value webs and take action to ensure that their practices respect and protect the rights of workers and communities. Viewing value webs from a human rights perspective can seem daunting when faced with extending oversight programs beyond a first tier of suppliers to numerous entities across the globe, reaching large numbers of people and communities in far flung places. Here is some advice to help you make sure your value web aligned with your positive values;
Map your procurement down to the level of commodity or raw material used wherever possible.  Assess all risk and impacts but start with critical purchasing that is key to the business and/or its product lines before reviewing non-key procurement. Prioritization allows your company to capitalize on leverage.
Prioritize high-risk purchasing by taking into account country risk, commodity and product risk, supplier risk etc. Always bear in mind the risk to the rights holders in these supply chains is the most important determinant of risk. 
 
Conduct a human rights impact assessment on high-risk purchasing. Healthy procurement may require collaborating with other key stakeholders, including other companies in your sector, governments, non-governmental organizations, impacted communities, and other actors. 
Fair Trade & Fair Value
Regenerative companies respect the principles of fair trade and pay fair value. Here are the Fair trade principles; 
 
Principle 1: Creating Opportunities for Economically Disadvantaged Producers
Support producers become economically independent to support poverty alleviation 
Principle 2: Transparency and Accountability
Involve producers in important decision making
 Principle 3: Fair Trading Practices
Trade fairly with concern for producers’ social, economic and environmental wellbeing
Principle 4:   Payment of a Fair Price
Pay producers a fixed price by mutual agreement, & ensure acceptable wages (re-location)
Principle 5:  Ensuring no Child Labour and Forced Labour
Adhering to the United Nations Convention on children’s rights.
Principle 6:  Commitment to Non-Discrimination, Equality & Freedom of Association
Respect trade union rights and reject discrimination based on gender, religion or ethnicity.
Principle 7:  Ensuring Good Working Conditions
Provide a safe and healthy working environment for producers and workers
Principle 8:  Providing Capacity Building
Support the development of skills of producers and workers so they can grow and prosper.
Principle 9:  Promoting Fair Trade
Raise awareness for better socio-economic justice by trading fairly with poor communities.
 Principle 10: Respect for the Environment
Use of sustainable energy and raw materials & minimise waste and pollution.
 
Case Study:  Divine Chocolate and Kuapa Kokoo
Cocoa production plays a major role in Ghana, with the country’s cocoa export top ranked globally for quality, and an average annual production of more than 700,000 tonnes making Ghana the world’s second largest cocoa producer after Côte d’Ivoire.  Cocoa employs 3.2 million and engages 865,000 smallholder farmers.  Kuapa Kokoo, which means ‘good cocoa farmer’ in Twi, is a cocoa-growing co-operative. The co-operative is also co-owner of the Divine Chocolate Company in the UK which markets chocolate products made from cocoa grown by Kuapa Kokoo. Of the co-op’s almost 90,000 members, 32% are women. Most of the cocoa-growing villages do not have access to healthcare, clean drinking water, or electricity, and have low levels of education. Since the co-operative was formed, some of the accrued benefits and impacts include;
348 bore holes were drilled for drinking water
Latrines constructed
Anti-malarial mosquito nets provided 
Mobile health services (clinics) to 17 districts, serving 200+ societies
Construction/refurbishment of eight schools, and a block of six classrooms
Introduction of seminars and workshops to help farmers develop alternative livelihoods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.Solutions Revolution: a Time for Radical Collaboration
                                     
“Where tough societal problems persist, citizens, social enterprises, and yes, even businesses, are relying less and less on government-only solutions. More likely, they are crowd funding, ride-sharing, app-developing or impact-investing to design lightweight solutions for seemingly intractable problems. No challenge is too daunting, from malaria in Africa to traffic congestion in California. These wavemakers range from edgy social enterprises growing at a clip of 15% a year, to mega-foundations that are eclipsing development aid, to Fortune 500 companies delivering social good on the path to profit. The collective force of these new problem solvers is creating dynamic and rapidly evolving markets for social good. They trade solutions instead of dollars to fill the gap between what government can provide and what citizens need. By erasing public-private sector boundaries, they are unlocking trillions of dollars in social benefit and commercial value.”  Eggers & Macmillan
Unlocking radical collaboration
The number of converging crises we face as a collective is unprecedented. From global warming and melting icecaps to soil erosion, air pollution, the spread of viruses like SARs and COVID-19, to overpopulation, rising poverty, ecosystem collapse, the greatest number of refugees since the second World War and mounting plastic pollution. Whereas previous challenges were resolved by academia, scientists, governments, multilaterals and civil society, the challenges we face today are of an order of such magnitude and such complexity that the only way we can resolve them fully is by working across silos and with radical collaboration in order to address them.
 
 
 
Symbiotic Partnership
Redefining the way that a business views partnerships, sits at the heart of the Regenerative model. A Regenerative mindset nurtures partnerships. As systems evolve, the development of a symbiotic dynamic fosters more efficient and mutually beneficial partnerships. The process of co-developing new products and services within the context of a fully secure and deep collaborative partnership is enriched by shared purpose. Regenerative business put collective intelligence and collaboration first, and fulfill their objectives by searching allies in the whole system. They share material and intellectual resources with them, they co-create solutions together with higher purpose and the highest good for all at the centre. René Dubos, the originator of the “think globally, act locally” approach,  concurs: “the goal of symbiotic relationships is not the maintenance of status quo but the emergence of new phenomena and new values.”                                       
Radical collaboration in nature
The forest ecosystem is a natural woodland ensemble of plants, animals, birds, insects and micro-organisms co-habiting in dynamic relationship and mutual exchange. Various species of trees co-exist in different shapes and sizes with recent research showing the mycelium on the forest floor acting as a kind of wood wide web distributing nutrients, energy, water and information. Trees take up as much space as they need to thrive and flourish.  Each tree is an ecosystem upon itself supporting insects, birds, mosses and funghi. Each tree feeds the forest floor when it sheds its leaves to create humus in such a highly efficient circular system that nothing is wasted and everything is reused and repurposed for the benefit of the forest community. Radical collaboration and the consequent sharing of resources and striving for balance and harmony seem to be important operating principles that allow the forest to thrive and flourish. 
 
“Impact partnerships are a specific type of multi-sector partnership, designed to create clear and meaningful impact towards a social or environmental goal. The partnerships set clear outcomes, have a transparent division of labour, they have a mechanism for taking stock, adapting and learning. As an innovation method, the central goal of an impact partnership is to scale current effective activity in a given area through the power of cross-sector collaboration, or to generate new ideas and solutions with measurable impact delivered across sectors”  Nesta, Innovation Foundation 
Impact partnerships can be built by bringing together;
Large corporates – with big resources, skilled and motivated teams with global reach.
Government - with convening power, funding, and ability to shift policy and regulation
Civil society - with of knowledge on social issues and fundraising capabilities
Social entrepreneurs - with disruptive ideas and drive
The best impact partnerships work to tackle entrenched social and environmental challenges by working out each parties’ key strengths and contributions and working out the best approach to address the challenge as a collective. Such collaborative approaches work to greatest effect where;
Existing solutions are not currently fulfilling their potential
Where efforts are disparate and uncoordinated
Where there is a high level of uncertainty and organisations are struggle to act alone
Case Study: WWF
Responsible forestry is another area where the principles of Regenerative business are working to create the right market incentives and trade practices while ensuring local communities are positively impacted today and tomorrow. Beyond simply managing forests, a Regenerative approach also seeks to enhance Resilience through local biodiversity conservation and procurement practices that restore and replenish. World Wildlife Fund’s Global Forest & Trade Network (GTFN) is one of the most forward-thinking efforts for saving the world's valuable and threatened forests. By working with companies committed to achieving and supporting responsible forestry, GFTN helps to create local market conditions that champion biodiversity while providing economic and social benefits for the communities - helping ensure forests thrive now and in the future.
Questions
How do you recognise your partners’ work and acknowledge the contribution to your success?
What steps can you take to ensure all of your procurement is regenerative and impactful?
Are all your suppliers fairly rewarded? If not, what steps can you take now to embed fairness?
How can you engage your suppliers to ensure they respect Human Rights?
To what extent have you fostered a culture of fairness in your own dealings i.e. with local workers?
What opportunities exist for empowering partners in order to make regenerative impacts?
What opportunities exist in terms of fostering collaborations in your sector and beyond for impact?










Glossary - Definitions

Anthropocene

Biodiversity
The number and types of plants and animals that exist in a particular area or in the world generally, or the problem of protecting this. (Cambridge)

Business
Living ecosystem of individuals working for a similar purpose putting people, planet, and individuals at the core of their priorities.

Carbon Neutral (also known as Net Zero)
A carbon neutral company will set and pursue an ambitious 1.5°C aligned science-based target for its full value-chain emissions. Any remaining hard-to-decarbonise emissions can be compensated using certified greenhouse gas removal. (Carbon Trust)

Carbon Negative (also known as Carbon Positive)
A carbon-negative company removes more carbon from the atmosphere than it releases.

Circular Economy
A circular economy is based on the principles of designing out waste and pollution, keeping products and materials in use, and regenerating natural systems. (Ellen MacArthur Foundation)

Doughnut Economics

Organizational culture
Organizational culture is the set of underlying beliefs, values, principles, and ways of interacting within an organization.

Edge Effect
Edge effects are the result of an abrupt transition between two different paradigms that are adjacent to each other in the same ecosystem.

Empowerment
Process of gaining freedom and power to do what you want or to control what happens to you. (Cambridge)

Holocene era
The period beginning around 11,000 years ago and continuing to the present. (Cambridge)

Human potential
Concept of cultivating extraordinary potential of human beings having untapped capabilities.

Intergenerational equity
Concept of fairness or justice between generations and gender. It implies the consideration of future generation needs, situation, and living conditions.

Intrapreneurship
Intrapreneurship is the act of behaving like an entrepreneur while working within a large organization. Intrapreneurship is known as the practice of a corporate management style that integrates risk-taking and innovation approaches, as well as the reward and motivational techniques, that are more traditionally thought of as being the province of entrepreneurship.

Locality
Local understanding of biodiversity, bio-regions & culture allowing companies to honour and respect places.

Moonshot
A type of thinking that aims to achieve something that is generally believed to be impossible. Moonshot thinking motivates teams to think big by framing problems as solvable and encouraging “anything is possible” dialogues around how to solve the challenge.

Natural Capital
Natural capital can be defined as the world’s stocks of natural assets which include geology, soil, air, water and all living things.(Nature Capital Forum)

Participation
The fact of actively and meaningfully taking part in doing some action or attempt.

Partnerships
Collaboration between two or more entities helping them to achieve greater results with the combination of their expertise, skills, and potential.

People
Human beings being key stakeholders of change to shape the world of tomorrow. 

Place
Communities of individuals evolving in a specific area and having similar living conditions, aspirations, and needs.

Planet
Blue pale dot that we call home.

Planetary Boundaries
The planetary boundaries concept presents a set of nine planetary boundaries within which humanity can continue to develop and thrive for generations to come. The 9 limitations are:     Climate change, Biodiversity loss, Nitrogen cycle, Phosphorus, Ocean acidification, Land use, Freshwater, Ozone depletion, Atmospheric aerosols, Chemical pollution. (Stockholm Resilience Centre)

Purpose
Goal and meaning of endeavours targeted by companies and individuals to achieve positive impact.

Regenerative business
Regenerative businesses are guided by a transformative evolutionary purpose serving people and planet. They are rooted in the four key values of right relationship to nature; elevating human potential; value for all; & honoring place and community. By definition, Regenerative businesses respect “wholeness” at all levels and think, design and operate systemically for greater Resilience.

Regenerative economy

Solutions Economy
Economy of innovative and pioneering solutions aligned with the planet, people, places, and partnerships offering efficient alternatives to global challenges.

Systemic Thinking
Science of making reliable inferences about behavior by developing an increasingly deep understanding of underlying structure. Systemic Thinking enables people to deliberately and systematically gain significantly deeper insights into challenging situations and complex domains by surfacing the interaction-patterns that underlie, drive and govern them.

Systemic Change
Changes that impact the whole system creating fundamental evolution and affecting the functioning of the system.

Stakeholder
Tier such as people, communities or organisation who:
can be impacted by the activities of the business. 
create impact on the activities of the business 

Teal organization
Characterized by self-management, wholeness, and a deeper sense of purpose, these organizations – describes as “Teal” by Laloux– operate largely without organization charts, management hierarchies, quarterly goals or other traditional management strategies.

Transformational change
A shift in the business culture of an organization resulting from a change in the underlying strategy and processes that the organization has used in the past. A transformational change is designed to be organization-wide and is enacted over a period of time. (Business dictionary)
Wealth 
Abundance of capital beyond financial wealth including knowledge, expertise, and experiences helping human beings to thrive.

Wellbeing economy
It starts with the idea that the economy should serve people and communities, first and
foremost;  allowing humanity to determine economics. (Wellbeing Alliance)

Whole System
Define the area in which a given business is impacted or is impacting across all the directions of  the Positive Compass (Planet, People, Partners, Places).



















































Join us















www.postv.net